Abrams, formerly Harry N. Abrams, Inc. (HNA), is an American publisher of art and illustrated books, children's books, and stationery.
The enterprise is a subsidiary of the French publisher La Martinière Groupe. Run by President and CEO Michael Jacobs, Abrams publishes and distributes approximately 250 titles annually and has more than 3,000 titles in print.
Abrams also distributes publications for the Victoria and Albert Museum, Tate, Vendome Press (in North America), Booth Clibborn Editions, SelfMadeHero, MoMA Children's Books, and 5 Continents.


Founded by Harry N. Abrams in 1949, Abrams was the first company in the United States to specialize in the creation and distribution of art books. Times Mirror acquired the company in 1966 and Harry Abrams retired in 1977. For many years, the company was under the direction of Paul Gottlieb (publisher) until January 2001, eighteen months before his death.  Abrams was acquired by La Martinière Groupe in 1997.In 2018, Abrams acquired The Overlook Press.




Abrams publishes illustrated books on the subjects of art, photography, performing arts, fashion, interior design, and nature and science.  Titles published by Abrams include The Art of Walt Disney, Earth from Above, Louis Vuitton: The Birth of Modern Luxury, The Diary of Frida Kahlo, Yoshitomo Nara: Nobody's Fool, The Wes Anderson Collection, The Selby Is in Your Place, Abrams Discoveries, and Vanity Fair 100 Years (about the two U.S. magazines: 1913-36 and from 1983).


Founded in 2012, Abrams Appleseed publishes board books, novelty books, and picture books for children up to age five. The imprint's list of titles includes Alphablock, Hippopposites, Pantone: Color, In My Heart, and the Mini Myths series.


Abrams Books for Young Readers publishes picture books and illustrated nonfiction for preschool through middle-grade readers.  The imprint's list of titles includes Library Mouse, Rosie Revere, Engineer, I Am Yoga, Animalia, Babar's Museum of Art, Separate Is Never Equal, Maritcha, and 365 Penguins.


Abrams Comicarts publishes graphic novels and illustrated books about the creators and the history of comics art, animation, and cartoons. Its titles include Mom's Cancer, Kirby: King of Comics, My Friend Dahmer, The Simpsons Futurama Crossover Crisis, R. Crumb's Heroes of Blues, Jazz & Country, and The Art of Rube Goldberg.


Abrams Image was launched in 2006 and publishes illustrated and non-illustrated books on music, humor, fashion, and popular culture. The imprint's titles include Plato and a Platypus Walk Into a Bar, Tim Gunn: A Guide to Quality, Taste & Style, Understand Rap, CBGB & OMFUG, The Steampunk Bible, Paris Street Style, Sh*tty Mom, and Cupcakes and Cashmere.


Abrams Noterie is a gift and stationery imprint that collaborates with authors, artists, and brands to make paper goods. Recent publications include Paris Street Style, The Kings County Distillery: Whiskey Notes, Hyperbole and a Half, Daily Dishonesty, and The Forest Feast gift and stationery collections.


Abrams Press publishes narrative non-fiction works relating to arts and culture, food, style, design, history, current events, science, technology, memoir, and biography. Titles include Grocery: The Buying and Selling of Food in America, Two-Dimensional Man, Breaking Bad 101, A Stash of One's Own, and David Lean by Stephen M. Silverman.


Amulet Books publishes novels, graphic novels, and nonfiction for young adults and middle-grade readers. The imprint has published many bestselling and award-winning books, including Jeff Kinney's Diary of a Wimpy Kid series, Heart of a Samurai, Cece Bell's El Deafo, Tom Angleberger's Origami Yoda series, and Michael Buckley's Sisters Grimm and NERDS series.


Amulet Paperbacks publishes original titles as well as reprints. Books published by Amulet Paperbacks include Lauren Myracle's Internet Girls series, A. G. Howard's Splintered series, Jesse Andrews's Me and Earl and the Dying Girl, and Jonathan Auxier's The Night Gardener.




Stewart, Tabori & Chang (ST&C), a publisher of cookbooks and craft titles, was purchased by Abrams in the late 1990s. In what CEO Michael Jacobs described in 2016 as a “unification strategy", all reprinted ST&C titles will appear under Abrams other existing imprints. In addition, a new corporate logo was rolled out simultaneously.

