General Bikram Singh, PVSM, UYSM, AVSM, SM, VSM, ADC  is a retired Indian army officer who served as the  25th Chief of Army Staff (COAS) of the Indian Army. Previously the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief of the army's Eastern Command, he succeeded General V. K. Singh as COAS on May 31, 2012. He retired on 31 July 2014. He is the second Sikh to be COAS, the first having been General J. J. Singh. He was also the Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee (CoSC) of the Indian armed forces.


As a young student, the future chief had considered becoming a doctor. He was an exceptional student of Zoology and Biology. But the wars of 1962 and 1965 motivated him to join the NDA in 1968. When asked whether he ever regrets the choice made, Bikram said, "If I were ever to be born again, I would only join the Indian Army."A graduate of the 40th course at the National Defence Academy, Singh was commissioned into the Sikh Light Infantry on 31 March 1972. He was adjudged the 'Best Young Officer' at the Young Officer's course at the Infantry School and was also awarded both the Commando Dagger for being the best commando and the 'Best in Tactics' trophy. He later was an instructor at the Commando and Weapons Wings of the Infantry School.After completing the Higher Command Course, he served his first tenure as a Director in the Military Operations (MO) Directorate. The tenure coincided with the Kargil War and he was the official spokesperson of the Army during that period. He went on to serve four important tenures at Army HQ: an additional tenure in the MO Directorate as the Deputy Director General, two tenures in the Perspective Planning Directorate, as the Deputy Director General of Perspective Planning (Strategy) and later, as the Additional Director General. He was posted back to the Army HQ as a Lieutenant General to serve as the Director General Staff Duties (DGSD) before taking over as Eastern Army Commander.Colleagues remember him for being a 'soldier's soldier' for spending time and working hard with his troops on the ground. 
He has held positions of General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Eastern Command, XV Corps, GOC 10th Infantry Division, Commander of Rashtriya Rifles Sector and GOC of the Multi-National Eastern Division in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He was wounded while posted as a Brigadier in Jammu & Kashmir, where he has spent much of his service.


Bikram Singh retired as Chief of Army Staff on 31 July 2014. He was succeeded by General Dalbir Singh.






Bikram Singh is married to Surjeet Kaur and the couple have two children.

