Jaglal Choudhary (1 March 1895 – 1975) was an Indian independence activist, dalit leader and politician from Bihar, India. He was also a reformer who championed the causes of women's rights, emancipation of dalits, education and land reforms in Bihar.


Jaglal was born in the Garkha village of Saran district in Bihar to Mushan Choudhary, a toddy seller of the Pasi caste. He was educated at the Chapra Zilla School, Patna College and the Medical College Calcutta.


Choudhary discontinued his medical education and joined the Non Cooperation Movement in 1921 heeding Gandhi's call. He became a member of the District Congress Committee and was arrested for his participation in the Salt Satyagraha. In 1941 he was arrested and jailed for taking part in the Individual Satyagraha and in 1942 at the height of the Quit India Movement he led a satyagraha and captured the police station and post office at Garkha. For this he was arrested and sentenced to five years imprisonment. One of Choudhary's sons was shot dead by the police during the movement. From 23 August 1942 until his release on 30 March 1946 Choudhary remained in prison.


Jaglal was first elected to the Bihar Legislative Assembly in 1937 as a Congress candidate and he went on to become the  fourth Minister, incharge of Public Health and Excise in the Congress Ministry headed by Premier S K Singh.During his tenure as minister for excise Choudhary introduced prohibition in several districts of Bihar. He was reelected to the Assembly again in 1946 and became Minister for Public Health and Harijan Welfare in the second Congress ministry. Following independence, he successfully contested the General elections of 1952 and was subsequently reelected to the Assembly in the elections of 1957, 1962, 1967 and 1969 from the Garkha reserved constituency.


Choudhary was an advocate of social reform in Bihar. During his term as excise minister, he introduced prohibition in Bihar. He was opposed to the caste system and advocated land reforms in Bihar calling for a land ceiling of three acres per family. In 1953 he wrote A Plan to Reconstruct Bharat.


Jaglal Choudhary died in 1975. The Jaglal Choudhary College in Chapra is named after him. A commemorative postage stamp on Jaglal Choudhary was released the Department of Posts in 2000.

