Juvenile fantasy is children's literature with fantasy elements:  fantasy intended for readers not yet adult.  
The protagonists are usually children or teens who have unique abilities, gifts, possessions or even allies that allow them to face powerful adversaries. Harry Potter is a powerful young wizard, one of the children of The Dark Is Rising series is an immature Old One with magical abilities, and in the His Dark Materials series the children have magical items and animal allies.  The plot frequently incorporates a bildungsroman.
In the earlier part of the 20th century, C. S. Lewis noted that fantasy was more accepted in juvenile literature, and therefore a writer interested in fantasy often wrote in it to find an audience.




Charles Kingsley: The Water-Babies
George MacDonald: The Princess and the Goblin, The Light Princess, At the Back of the North Wind
Lewis Carroll: Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, Through the Looking-glass
Carlo Collodi: The Adventures of Pinocchio


L. Frank Baum: The Wonderful Wizard of Oz and its many sequels
J.M. Barrie: Peter Pan; or, the Boy Who Wouldn't Grow Up
E. Nesbit: Five Children and It, The Phoenix and the Carpet, The Story of the Amulet, The Enchanted Castle, The Magic City
J. R. R. Tolkien: The Hobbit
Antoine de Saint-Exupéry: The Little Prince


C. S. Lewis: The Chronicles of Narnia
Robert A. Heinlein: the Heinlein juveniles, a set of 12 books that includes Starship Troopers
T. H. White, The Sword in the Stone and Mistress Masham's Repose
Tove Jansson: the Moomin series
Mary Norton: The Borrowers series


Susan Cooper: The Dark Is Rising
Roald Dahl: Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, James and the Giant Peach, Matilda, The BFG and others
Diana Wynne Jones: The Lives of Christopher Chant, Charmed Life
Alan Garner: The Weirdstone of Brisingamen, The Owl Service
Andre Norton: the Witch World series
Ursula K. Le Guin: A Wizard of Earthsea and its sequels
Brian Jacques: the Redwall series
Anne McCaffrey: the Dragonriders of Pern Harper Hall trilogy
Madeleine L'Engle: the Time Quartet
Lloyd Alexander: The Prydain Chronicles


Philip Pullman: His Dark Materials, Clockwork and The Firework-Maker's Daughter
J. K. Rowling: Harry Potter
Holly Black and Tony DiTerlizzi: The Spiderwick Chronicles
Cornelia Funke: The Thief Lord, Inkheart trilogy, Dragon Rider
Mary Pope Osborne: The Magic Tree House series
Tamora Pierce: The Song of the Lioness, Circle of Magic, and sequels
Rick Riordan: Percy Jackson & the Olympians and other series in the Camp Half-Blood Chronicles, The Kane Chronicles, and Magnus Chase and the Gods of Asgard
Christopher Paolini: Eragon
Angie Sage: Septimus Heap
Erin Hunter: Warriors, Seekers, and Survivors series
Jennifer A. Nielsen: The False Prince trilogy
Chris Colfer: The Land of Stories
Tui T. Sutherland: Wings of Fire series
Maricar Banguis: Otuna's Flute

