Larson International is a designer and manufacturer of amusement rides based in Plainview, Texas. The company has designed its own collection of amusement rides, as well as owning rights to rides originally designed by Bisch-Rocco and Sellner Manufacturing.



J & S, Rides, Inc., currently doing business as Larson International, dates back to at least 1988.In January 2002, Larson International, along with AmTech and International Ride Services, hosted the annual Amusement Industry Manufacturers & Suppliers (AIMS) Safety Seminar.In February 2002, Larson International acquired the rights to Bisch-Rocco's Flying Scooters ride. In the late 1920s, Alvin Bisch and Ralph Rocco designed a rotating, ride-like device for training pilots. In the 1930s, this design evolved into the Flying Scooters amusement ride. Several installations were manufactured by Bisch and Rocco. The first new installation by Larson International was purchased by California's Great America and installed in 2002.In January 2011, Larson International purchased Sellner Manufacturing, an amusement ride company based in Faribault, Minnesota. Sellner Manufacturing's foundations date back to 1923 when Herbert W. Sellner invented a Water-Toboggan Slide. In 1926, Sellner invented the Tilt-A-Whirl ride and founded Sellner Manufacturing. The company invented other products over the years, but the Tilt-A-Whirl was its most popular ride, with nearly 1,000 units manufactured to 2010. In the late 2000s, Sellner Manufacturing, which was then led by great-granddaughter Erin Sellner Ward, was facing financial difficulties. The State Bank of Faribault approached Larson International for a possible takeover. Larson International's acquisition saw the company gain ownership of everything except Sellner's building. This included the relocation of all ride plans, molds, computers, office furniture, equipment and machines, to Larson International's Plainview facility.




In the past, Larson International has had informal alliances with other manufacturers including Chance Rides, S&S Power and NBGS, whereby the manufacturers would assist in the fabrication of each other's rides in exchange for revenue sharing. Products previously designed and manufactured by Larson International are shown in the table below.


Many of Larson International's ride have been sold to fairground operators as portable, travelling rides. A listing of rides permanently installed at amusement parks is shown in the table below.

