Pippi Longstocking (Swedish: Pippi Långstrump) is a Swedish TV series based on Astrid Lindgren's Pippi Longstocking children's books. The show ran for thirteen episodes, the first episode being broadcast 8 February 1969 on Sveriges Television.
The series' theme song, "Here Comes Pippi Longstocking" ("Här Kommer Pippi Långstrump") was composed by Jan Johansson (in one of his last works, before his death a year before the series aired), with lyrics by Astrid Lindgren. The song was sung by series star Inger Nilsson.


The Swedish series was re-edited as two dubbed feature films for distribution in the United States. They became weekend television staples in several cities in America throughout the 1970s and 1980s.Additionally, the two feature film spin-offs from 1970, which featured the same cast and crew, were also dubbed in English for USA distribution.
The re-edited TV-series feature films are:

Pippi Longstocking (Swedish title: Pippi Långstrump) (1969) (USA release 1973)
Pippi Goes on Board (Swedish title: Här kommer Pippi Långstrump) (1969) (USA release 1975)The feature film spin-offs are:

Pippi in the South Seas (Swedish title: Pippi Långstrump på de sju haven) (1970) (USA release 1975)
Pippi on the Run (Swedish title: På rymmen med Pippi Långstrump) (1970) (USA release 1977)The first six uncut episodes of the original series, newly-dubbed in English using British actors, and remastered from new film prints became available on DVD in 2002 by Hen’s Tooth Video and Junior.TV GmbH & Co. KG.


The Swedish town where the show is set is Visby in Gotland, the largest island in the Baltic Sea and the location of Villa Villekulla.


"Pippi flyttar in i Villa Villekulla"
"Pippi går i affärer"
"Pippi är sakletare och går på kalas"
"Pippi ordnar en utflykt"
"Pippi får besök av tjuvar"
"Pippi går på tivoli"
"Pippi i den första snön"
"Pippis jul"
"Pippi hittar en spunk"
"Pippis ballongfärd"
"Pippi är skeppsbruten"
"Pippi håller avskedskalas"
"Pippi går ombord"



Inger Nilsson as Pippi Longstocking
Pär Sundberg as Tommy
Maria Persson as Annika
Beppe Wolgers as Captain Efraim Longstocking
Margot Trooger as Mrs. Prysselius
Hans Clarin as Dunder-Karlsson
Paul Esser as Blom
Ulf G. Johnsson as Kling
Göthe Grefbo as Klang
Fredrik Ohlsson as Mr. Settergren
Öllegård Wellton as Mrs. Settergren
Staffan Hallerstam as Benke

