Ronja, the Robber's Daughter (Japanese: 山賊の娘ローニャ, Hepburn: Sanzoku no Musume Rōnya) is a Japanese cel-shaded computer-animated television series, based on the novel Ronia, the Robber's Daughter (Ronja Rövardotter) written by Astrid Lindgren. The series is directed by Gorō Miyazaki and animated by Polygon Pictures, and co-produced by Studio Ghibli.Miyazaki stated, "Ronja, the Robber's Daughter is a story not just about a girl who grows into adulthood, but it is also a story about the love and growth between a parent and a child, and a story about the bonds between friends. My goal is to create a work that everyone, from children to adults, will be able to enjoy."UK-based distributor Serious Lunch has acquired the worldwide distribution rights, except for Japan and Scandinavia. It sought English-language broadcasters and brought the series to potential backers at the 2015 Annecy International Animated Film Festival. Amazon began streaming the series on its Amazon Prime streaming service on January 27, 2017. GKIDS will release the series in the United States on August 20, 2019 (distributed by Shout! Factory), and additional licenses were sold in China (UYoung Media) and Taiwan (PTS). The English dub is narrated by Gillian Anderson.


Ronja, the only child of a bandit chief, grows up among a clan of robbers living in a castle in the woodlands of early-Medieval Scandinavia. When Ronja grows old enough she ventures into the forest, exploring and discovering its wonders and dangers like the mystical creatures that dwell there. She learns to live in the forest through her own strength, with the occasional rescue by her parents. Ronja's life begins to change, however, when she happens upon a boy her own age named Birk, who turns out to be the son of the rival clan chief.


Ronja (ローニャ, Ronya) Voiced by: Haruka Shiraishi (Japanese), Teresa Gallagher (English)
Mattis (マッティス, Mattisu) Voiced by: Takaaki Seki (Japanese), Rufus Hound (English)
Lovis (ロヴィス, Rovisu) Voiced by: Yukari Nozawa (Japanese), Morwenna Banks (English)
Birk (ビルク, Biruku) Voiced by: Reika Uyama (Japanese), Kelly Adams (English)
Borka (ボルカ, Boruka) Voiced by: Atsuki Tani (Japanese), Bob Golding (English)
Undis (ウンディス, Undisu) Voiced by: Mika Doi (Japanese), Beth Chalmers (English)
Noddle-Pete (スカッレ・ペール, Sukarre-Peru) Voiced by: Umeji Sasaki (Japanese), Adrian Edmondson (English)
Fjosok (フョーソク, Fyosoku) Voiced by: Shoichiro Akaboshi (Japanese), Rasmus Hardiker (English)
Pelje (ペリェ, Perye) Voiced by: Yūsuke Tezuka (Japanese), Rasmus Hardiker (English)
Tjorm (チョルム, Chorumu) Voiced by: Takeo Ogawa (Japanese), Rasmus Hardiker (English)
Sturkas (ストゥルカス, Suturukasu) Voiced by: Kenji Sugimura (Japanese), Rasmus Hardiker (English)
Knotas (クノータス, Kunotasu) Voiced by: Takahiro Shimada (Japanese), Bob Golding (English)
Tjegge (チェッゲ, Chegge) Voiced by: Rintarou Nishi (Japanese), Bob Golding (English)
Lill-Klippen (リル・クリッペン, Riru-Kurippen) Voiced by: Keiji Himeno (Japanese), Giles New (English)
Jutis (ユティス, Yutisu) Voiced by: Giles New (English)
Joen (ヨエン, Yoen) Voiced by: Giles New (English)
Labbas (ラッバス, Rabbasu) Voiced by: Giles New (English)
Turre (トゥッレ, Turre) Voiced by: Giles New   (English)
Narrator (語り手, Katarite) Voiced by: Fukiko Endō (Japanese), Gillian Anderson (English)
Harpy (鳥女, Tori-onna) Voiced by: Saori Kato (Japanese), Jules de Jongh (English)
Gray Dwarfs (灰色小人, Haiiro kobito)
Unearthly Ones (地下のものたち, Chika no mono-tachi)
Rumphobs (ずんぐり小人, Zunguri kobito) Voiced by: Jonathan Ross, Jennifer Marriott and Naomi Freedman (English)
Murktrolls (暗がりトロル, Kuragari tororu)




Original creator: Astrid Lindgren
Series composition and script:  Hiroyuki Kawasaki
Character design: Katsuya Kondo
Art: Kaichi Fukudome and Sadaaki Honma
Storyboards: Gorō Miyazaki
Executive Producer: Keisuke Tsuchihashi
Music: Satoshi Takebe
Sound director: Koji Kasamatsu
Post-Recording Director: Eriko Kimura
Music production: Victor Entertainment, Sunrise Music
Chief director: Gorō Miyazaki
Animation production: Polygon Pictures
Production cooperation: Studio Ghibli
Production: NHK Enterprises
Production and copyright: NHK, Dwango
Licensing: The Astrid Lindgren Company (Scandinavia), Serious Lunch (worldwide except for Japan and Scandinavia)


Opening theme
Haru no Sakebi (春のさけび, lit. Shout of Spring)
Performance: Aoi Teshima
Lyrics and composition: Hiroko Taniyama and Goro Miyazaki
Arrangement: Satoshi TakebeEnding theme
Player
Performance: Mari Natsuki


Critical reception of Sanzoku no Musume Rōnya was mostly positive. The series was praised in reviews by The Guardian, Collider The Daily Dot, Slate, iDigitalTimes, Starburst, Mir Fantastiki, among others. Meanwhile, Swedish journalist Yukiko Duke, The Onion's The A.V. Club and Polygon published negative reviews. The show was praised for its visual beauty and being faithful to the original novel, but criticized for slow pacing.



