Steppenwolf Theatre Company is a Chicago theatre company founded in 1974 by Terry Kinney, Jeff Perry, and Gary Sinise in the Unitarian church on Half Day Road in Deerfield and is now located in Chicago's Lincoln Park neighborhood on Halsted Street. Its name comes from the novel Steppenwolf by Hermann Hesse which original member Rick Argosh was reading during the company's inaugural production, And Miss Reardon Drinks a Little, in January 1974.


The name Steppenwolf Theatre Company was first used in 1974 at a Unitarian church on Half Day Road in Deerfield The company presented And Miss Reardon Drinks a Little by Paul Zindel, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead by Tom Stoppard, and The Glass Menagerie by Tennessee Williams, with Rick Argosh directing, and Grease by Jim Jacobs and Warren Casey, with Gary Sinise directing.The founding members are Terry Kinney, Jeff Perry, and Gary Sinise. The founders recruited six additional members:  H.E. Baccus, Nancy Evans, Moira Harris, John Malkovich, Laurie Metcalf, and Alan Wilder.In 1975, Steppenwolf incorporated as a nonprofit organization, saving money by taking the name of a failed theater company that had already incorporated. In the summer of 1976, Steppenwolf took up residence in a vacant basement space of the Immaculate Conception Catholic Church in Highland Park, Illinois and produced its first full season of plays.In 1980, the theater company moved into a 134-seat theater at the Jane Addams Hull House Center on Broadway Avenue in Chicago.  Two years later, the company moved to a 211-seat facility at 2851 N. Halsted Street, which was their home until 1991, when construction was completed on the current theater complex at 1650 N. Halsted Street (with administrative offices at 1700 N. Halsted Street.) The theatre has three theatres: the Downstairs Theatre that seats 515; the Upstairs Theatre that seats 299; and, the 1700 Theatre a casual, intimate and flexible theatre that seats 80.In 1982, the Sam Shepard play True West, starring Sinise and John Malkovich, was the first of many Steppenwolf productions to travel to New York City. 
In 1994, the company made its Los Angeles debut with Steve Martin's first play, Picasso at the Lapin Agile.
In 1996, after successful runs in Chicago and New York, Lyle Kessler's Orphans, directed by Gary Sinise, was the first Steppenwolf production to go international, debuting in London.
The MacArthur Foundation awarded Steppenwolf Theatre Company $2.26 million between 1978 and 2017, in support of general operations, and growth of artistic and educational programs.


Steppenwolf is an ensemble theatre founded by Laurie Metcalf, H.E. Baccus, Terry Kinney, Jeff Perry, and Gary Sinise. Its members have included actors Joan Allen, Kevin Anderson, Alana Arenas, Randall Arney, Kate Arrington, Ian Barford, Robert Breuler, Gary Cole, Celeste M. Cooper, Glenn Davis, Kathryn Erbe, Audrey Francis, Jim Fitzpatrick, Francis Guinan, Jon Michael Hill, Tom Irwin, Ora Jones, John Mahoney, John Malkovich, Sandra Marquez, Mariann Mayberry, James Vincent Meredith, Laurie Metcalf, Amy Morton, Sally Murphy, Caroline Neff, Austin Pendleton, William Petersen, Martha Plimpton, Rondi Reed, Molly Regan, Karen Rodriguez, Namir Smallwood, Lois Smith, Rick Snyder, Jim True-Frost, Alan Wilder. It also includes playwrights Tina Landau, Tracy Letts, Tarell Alvin McCraney, Bruce Norris, Rajiv Joseph and Eric Simonson, and directors Frank Galati, K. Todd Freeman, Terry Kinney, Martha Lavey, Yasen Peyankov and Anna D. Shapiro among its members.


Notable productions include:

Airline Highway by Lisa D'Amour
Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? by Edward Albee (Starring Tracy Letts and Amy Morton)
Clybourne Park by Bruce Norris
August: Osage County by Tracy Letts
True West by Sam Shepard
 Lydie Breeze directed by H.E. Baccus
Balm in Gilead by Lanford Wilson, directed by John Malkovich
And a Nightingale Sang by C. P. Taylor
Orphans by Lyle Kessler
Coyote Ugly (1985) by Lynn Seifert, directed by John Malkovich
Burn This by Lanford Wilson
The Grapes of Wrath adapted by company member Frank Galati


Through its New Plays Initiative, the company maintains ongoing relationships with writers of international prominence while continuing to support the work of aspiring and mid-career playwrights. In 1988, Steppenwolf presented the world premiere of Frank Galati's adaption of The Grapes of Wrath, based on the John Steinbeck novel, which eventually went on to win the Tony Award for Best Play. In 2000 Steppenwolf presented the world premiere of Austin Pendleton's Orson's Shadow, which subsequently was staged off-Broadway and by regional theatres throughout the country.
Tracy Letts' Broadway drama August: Osage County (2007) was ranked number one in Time's Top Ten Theatre Performances of 2007. After moving from the Imperial Theatre next door to The Music Box Theatre for an open-ended run, August: Osage County won five Tony Awards including Best Play of 2007, Best Director (Anna D. Shapiro), Best Leading Actress (Deanna Dunagan), Best Featured Actress (Rondi Reed), and Best Scenic Design (Todd Rosenthal). Letts went on to win the 2008 Pulitzer Prize for Drama for his play.
Among the theater's many honors are the Tony Award for Regional Theatre Excellence (1985) and the National Medal of Arts (1998).

