The Sweetener World Tour is the fourth concert tour by American singer Ariana Grande, in support of her fourth and fifth studio albums,  Sweetener (2018) and Thank U, Next (2019). The tour began on March 18, 2019, in Albany, New York, and is set to conclude on December 22, 2019, in Inglewood, California.



On May 6, 2018, Grande finally hinted at a tour via her official Twitter account, shortly after announcing the title for her upcoming album on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon. Three months later, she announced there were plans for a tour, stating that her team were "workin [sic] on it all now". Grande embarked to a promotional concert tour for Sweetener, The Sweetener Sessions, which began on August 20, 2018, in New York City, United States and ended on September 4, 2018, in London, England. Tour passes were also made available via her official website shortly after. Grande announced the title of the tour as the "Sweetener World Tour" on October 24, 2018, announcing its North American dates a day later.The first leg of the tour visited 40 cities across North America, beginning on March 18, 2019, in Albany and concluding on August 4, 2019, at Lollapalooza. Pre-sale for the tickets for the first leg of the tour took place between November 1 and November 3, 2018. On November 5, 2018, tickets were opened to the general public, and Grande announced Normani and Social House as her opening acts. On December 10, 2018, due to popular demand, second shows were added in Chicago, Los Angeles, Miami, Brooklyn, New York City, Washington, D.C., Boston, Philadelphia, and Toronto. On January 14, 2019, the shows in Chicago, Indianapolis, Columbus, Milwaukee, St. Louis, Saint Paul, Denver and Salt Lake City were rescheduled and the shows in Omaha and Raleigh were cancelled due to Grande headlining the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival on April 14 and April 21, 2019, and a new show was added in Las Vegas. On May 28, 2019, the shows in Tampa and Orlando were rescheduled due to illness.On December 14, 2018, Grande announced the European dates for the tour. A special show is being planned in Manchester. The second leg of the tour is set to visit 19 cities across Europe, beginning on August 17, 2019, in London and concluding on October 16, 2019, in London. Pre-sale for the tickets for the second leg of the tour took place between December 19 and December 21, 2018, for the United Kingdom, and between December 18 and December 20, 2018, for all other dates. On December 20, 2018, tickets were opened to the general public (excluding the United Kingdom), and due to popular demand, additional shows were added in Amsterdam, Paris and Dublin. On December 21, 2018, tickets were opened to the general public in the United Kingdom, and due to popular demand, additional shows were added in London and Birmingham. On February 25, 2019, due to popular demand, additional shows were added in Hamburg and Dublin. On March 5, 2019, Grande announced that Ella Mai would be the opening act for the European leg of the tour. On June 11, 2019, due to popular demand, additional shows were added in London. On August 9, 2019, the first show in Hamburg and the show in Prague were rescheduled, and the show in Kraków was cancelled.On June 20, 2019, Grande announced another North American leg of the tour. It is set to visit 19 cities across the United States, including the rescheduled Tampa and Orlando shows, beginning on November 9, 2019, in Uniondale and concluding on December 22, 2019, in Inglewood. Pre-sale for the tickets for the third leg of the tour took place between June 26 and June 30, 2019. On July 1, 2019, tickets were opened to the general public. On July 11, 2019, due to popular demand, additional shows were added in San Francisco and Inglewood.Grande announced she would be partnering with nonprofit voter registration group HeadCount, for registering new voters ahead of the 2020 presidential election in March via Instagram, telling fans to “use your voice and get your ‘thank u, next gen’ sticker.” In July, it was reported that HeadCount registered twice as many voters during “Sweetener” as any other tour over the last three years, being the most successful single artist tour for voter registration HeadCount has seen since 2008.



The tour has received positive reviews from critics. Brittany Spanos from Rolling Stone gave the opening night at Albany a positive review, stating that "Grande's new world tour is full of emotional drama, iconic looks, and undeniable hits". Spanos also commented on Grande's looks, stating that "fewer and fewer young stars today have the kind of distinctive aesthetic that can be reproduced en masse by fans, but Grande has dedicated years to perfecting how she has presented herself. In 2019, it seems the world has finally caught up to her. Or, as her frequent collaborator and friend Nicki Minaj predicted on “Side to Side” three years ago: “Ariana run pop." Chris Richards of the Washington Post gave a positive review to Grande's show in Washington D.C, stating that "Ariana Grande reached the height of her fame by making heavy feel light". He praised her vocals stating that "Grande's voice is equal parts breathy and acrobatic, and she knows how to hit a big note like she's whispering it". Chris Willman of Variety praised Grande's two night show at the Staples Center in Los Angeles, calling the show "giddy, splendorous, beautifully designed, expertly performed and almost a little bit avant-garde in its staging". He also stated that it was "much more than at Coachella, her visually experimental Staples stop was revealed as a thing of inventive beauty, not to mention expertly sung fun."The second leg of the tour in Europe has also received positive reviews. Adam White of The Telegraph gave the show a 5 out of 5 stars, stating that the show was "a night of magic and melancholy from the most exciting young star in pop". Cydney Yeates of Metro gave the show 4 out of 5 stars, stating that "there's nothing more to say now besides God*is*a woman and her name is Ariana Grande."  Hannah Mylrea of NME noted that "the production was fairly understated, putting the full focus on her impressive vocals, but there were moments of impressive choreography".Grande's headlining performance at the 2019 Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival was praised by critics, with many praising her vocals, visuals, and guest appearances, particularly the appearance of NSYNC. Shad Powers of USA Today stated that "Grande closed out Weekend One of Coachella in style, putting together a set that included special guests, stunning visuals, and of course her undeniable voice." Rhian Daly of NME called her set "a breathtaking moment of light in a dark world". She also stated that, after the end of the set, "the feeling was already mutual long before Grande took to the stage but [...] its foundations are more solid than ever". In another positive review, Ben Beaumont-Thomas of The Guardian stated that "with her headline set surveying her entire career, [Grande's] work forms a fascinating, still-unfolding pop Bildungsroman: every sexual epiphany and personal milestone sketched out in real time, resulting in a uniquely involving opus. You can see why she is such an icon to a generation who also tell their own stories in public, via Snapchat and Instagram." Claire Shaffer from Rolling Stone stated that "Grande gave a star-studded headlining performance", naming NSYNC's guest appearance as one of the best moments of the 2019 Coachella. Suzy Exposito continued, "Grande became one of the boys that night, claiming Timberlake’s verses from the center stage and whipping her lustrous, anime pony like a boss." Lyndsey Havens of Billboard called Grande's set "epic" and stated that she "continues to rewrite the rule book for pop stardom and admittedly fosters a new relationship with herself." She praised Grande's collaboration with NSYNC, stating "all together with Grande, they delivered well-practiced choreography, sang the track she samples with her filling in for Timberlake and finally ended with "Tearin' Up My Heart."



This set list is representative of the March 18, 2019 show in Albany. It does not represent all concerts for the duration of the tour.


During the first show in Boston, Grande performed "Rule the World" with 2 Chainz.
During the first show in Washington, D.C., Grande performed an unreleased song titled "Got Her Own" with Victoria Monét.
During the show in Montreal, the second show in Los Angeles, and the first shows in Inglewood and Las Vegas, Grande performed "Monopoly" with Victoria Monét.
During the first show at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, Grande performed "Break Up with Your Girlfriend, I'm Bored" and "Tearin' Up My Heart" with NSYNC, "Side to Side" and "Bang Bang" with Nicki Minaj, and "Mo Money Mo Problems" with Diddy and Mase. "Successful", "Bloodline", "Fake Smile", "Make Up", "You'll Never Know", "Everytime", and "One Last Time" were not performed.
During the second show at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, Grande performed "Bang Bang", and "Sorry" with Justin Bieber. "Successful", "Bloodline", "Fake Smile", "Make Up", "You'll Never Know", "Goodnight n Go", "Everytime", and "One Last Time" were not performed.
Starting with the show in Edmonton, "One Last Time" was removed from the set list.
Starting with the first show in Phoenix, "Goodnight n Go" was removed from the set list and replaced with "Get Well Soon".
During the show in Charlotte, Grande performed "Tattooed Heart" and "Piano".
Starting with the second show in Washington, D.C., "Bloodline" was removed from the set list.
During the show at Lollapalooza, Grande performed "Boyfriend" with Social House. "Raindrops (An Angel Cried)", "Successful", "Love Me Harder", "Fake Smile", "Make Up", "Right There", "You'll Never Know",  "Break Your Heart Right Back", and "Everytime" were not performed.
Starting with the first show in London, "Get Well Soon" was removed from the set list and replaced with "Only 1", and "Boyfriend" was added to the set list.
During the show at Manchester Pride, Grande only performed "No Tears Left to Cry", "Be Alright", "Break Up with Your Girlfriend, I'm Bored", "Side to Side", "7 Rings", "Break Free", "Breathin", "Thank U, Next", and "One Last Time".
Starting with the show in Helsinki, "Only 1" was removed from the set list and replaced with "Tattooed Heart".







