Södermanland County (Swedish: Södermanlands län) is a county or län on the southeast coast of Sweden. In the local Sörmlandic dialects it is usually shortened and pronounced as Sörmlands län, or simply Sörmland, which is the dominant pronunciation and spelling inside the county. For example, the name of the local County Council is Region Sörmland. It borders the counties of Östergötland, Örebro, Västmanland, Uppsala, Stockholm and to the Baltic Sea. It holds the popular camping route called "Sörmlandsleden" which is a system of trails covering a total of approximately 100 mil (1000 km) of walking paths, in Södermanland.
It is an administrative unit, covering most of the province Södermanland. The eastern parts of the Södermanland province, largely corresponding to the Södertörn area, belong to Stockholm County. As a result of this longstanding divide, only areas inside the county are usually considered as Sörmlandic as opposed to a part of the extended Stockholm metropolitan area.


The main aim of the County Administrative Board is to fulfil the goals set in national politics by the Riksdag and the Government, to coordinate the interests of the county, to promote the development of the county, to establish regional goals and safeguard the due process of law in the handling of each case. The County Administrative Board is a Government Agency headed by a Governor. See List of Södermanland Governors.


Södermanland runs between the lake Mälaren to the north and the Baltic Sea to its east and south. There is a large distance between the two main urban areas Eskilstuna and Nyköping of roughly 80 kilometres (50 mi), and vast forested areas in between. The centre of Södermanland is spread out between four municipality seats namely Vingåker, Katrineholm, Flen and Gnesta that separate the southern and northern areas of the county. Most parts are low-lying being part of the Mälar valley, but some higher areas can be found.
The climate much like other parts of southern Sweden is a mix between oceanic and moderated continental. Summers highs are most often around 23 °C (73 °F), lows around 12 °C (54 °F) and winter highs around 0 °C (32 °F) with lows around −5 °C (23 °F). It can heavily fluctuate between different years with influences from different weather systems. Most often winters are still pronounced enough for the climate to be a clear four-season climate.


Region Sörmland is the name of the Regional Council of Södermanland, the county's self-governing local authority.As of 2019, the local government constellation consists of the Social Democrats, Vård för Pengarna (lit. Care for the money, a local single-issue party founded by doctors) and the Centre Party. The coalition holds a majority in the Regional Council with 42 seats out of 71 total.




Eskilstuna
Flen
Gnesta
Katrineholm
Nyköping
Oxelösund
Strängnäs
Trosa
Vingåker


This is a list of Södermanland's urban areas or tätorter (dense localities with a population of at least 200).


Södermanland County inherited its coat of arms from the province of Södermanland. When it is shown with a royal crown it represents the County Administrative Board.


The province of Södermanland was divided into three counties in the 17th century; Nyköping County, Gripsholm County and Eskilstunahus County. They were merged into present day Södermanland County in 1683.

