Todd Hughes (born August 13, 1963) is an American screenwriter, producer and film director. He is a Columbia University graduate and currently resides in Los Angeles.
His short film directing credits include "Kaka Ferskur" (1988) and "Ding Dong" (1995). He directed the independent feature "The New Women" (2001) starring Mary Woronov and wrote for the Fox television series Wicked Wicked Games (2007) starring Tatum O'Neal. He produced his first documentary "Hit So Hard" with Christina Soletti about drummer Patty Schemel of the seminal grunge band Hole, which had its world premiere at SXSW 2011 and was released theatrically in 2012.In 2001, he was named one of Filmmaker Magazine's New Faces of Indie Film and he is half of a long-standing creative partnership with filmmaker P. David Ebersole, his husband.
Together, Ebersole and Hughes are Executive Producers of Room 237. a subjective documentary that explores the numerous theories about the hidden meanings within Stanley Kubrick's film "The Shining."
Premiering on Lifetime on May 6, 2013 as a mother's day special, Todd is producer of the documentary Dear Mom, Love Cher as well as Executive Producer along with P. David Ebersole (who also wrote and directed), Cher, Risa Shapiro and Tanya Lopez. Focusing on the superstar actress/singer's mother Georgia Holt, "Dear Mom, Love Cher" provides a rare peek into Cher's fascinating family history.
His latest film, Mansfield 66/67, premiered at the 2017 International Film Festival Rotterdam (IFFR) where Paris-based International sales outfit Stray Dogs picked up worldwide rights. About the last two years of movie goddess Jayne Mansfield’s life and the rumours swirling around her untimely death being caused by a curse after her alleged romantic dalliance with Anton LaVey, head of the Church of Satan. Mansfield 66/67 is "a true story based on rumour and hearsay," celebrating Jayne's life on the 50th anniversary of her death.  Directed by Hughes with his husband P. David Ebersole , and produced by Ebersole, Hughes and Larra Anderson, it was released theatrically in North America for Halloween 2017 by Gunpowder & Sky.

