The weapons master, sometimes credited as the armorer, weapons specialist, weapons handler, weapons wrangler, or weapons coordinator, is a film crew specialist that works with the property master, director, actors, stunt coordinator and script supervisor. The weapons master is specifically responsible for maintaining control of any weapon props (including firearms, knives, swords, bows, and staff weapons).


The weapons master is present whenever a scene with a weapon is to be shot. They present the actor with the weapon just prior to the scene, and they take control of the weapon when the scene is done. It is the primary function of the weapons master to ensure that the weapons under their control do not cause harm to the cast, crew or production property. Secondary functions include ensuring that the weapons can achieve the director's goals in terms of appearance and function, and that they meet the continuity requirements for the production. While some weapons masters work exclusively in film production, others are specialists outside of the media profession who are called in because of their familiarity, licensing and qualifications with the weapons in question. Some weapons masters (particularly in lower-budget productions) are also responsible for training the actors.  Prior to the 1980s, weapons were frequently the responsibility of the property master or his assistant, but since then, it has become increasingly common in the industry for the property master to a hire a dedicated weapons master in order to reduce the burden on himself.  However, it is still common for the property master to double as the weapons master, as a cost-saving measure, on productions where National Firearms Act-regulated firearms (such as machine guns or sawed-off shotguns) are not being used.


Robert "Rock" Galotti: Founder of Motion Picture Weapons; film credits include The Matrix (franchise), Starship Troopers (film), The Expendables, Jarhead (film), Black Mass (film), The Hateful Eight, Gangster Squad, Face/Off, The Last Samurai, Windtalkers, and Platoon (film), as well as numerous TV shows such as Bosch (TV series), "Lethal Weapon (TV series)".
Harry Lu: Former Stembridge armorer (now freelance) and veteran of many action movies and crime thrillers; film credits include Terminator 2: Judgment Day, Batman, True Lies,Heat, The Patriot, Pearl Harbour, War Of the Worlds, and Training Day. Batman, Mission Impossible, Inception, Pirate of the Caribbean movies, The Lone Ranger
William Curtin: Founder and Owner of Weapons & Effects, Novato, Ca.: Film Credits include Born on the Fourth of July, Outbreak, Sniper, Forest Gump, Windtalkers, The Hunted, Desert Heat, Dead Presidents, Anna and the King, Metro, Midnight Caller, Nash Bridges and 2007-2018 as a Subject Matter Expert with the U.S. Dept. of Defense (DOD) in Ex-Soviet/COMBLOC Crew Served and Individual Weapon Systems Along with 20+ years Firearm Manufacturer for 20+ Law Enforcement Agencies. Also a California Class 1 Pyrotechnician and High Explosives Manufacturer for the DOD and Film Industry.
Michael Papac: Founder of Cinema Weaponry; film credits include the Lethal Weapon and Die Hard series, Three Kings, We Were Soldiers, Red, Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines, and xXx.
Mike Gibbons: Founder of Gibbons, Ltd.; film credits include RoboCop 3, Collateral and The A-Team.
Gary Harper: Owner of Harperhaus Weapons FX and authorized Armorer for ISS, credits include the Flags of our Fathers, Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World, "Raid on Son Tay", Showtime series Deadliest Warrior and Rambo III.
Thell Reed: Former World Champion live ammo quick-draw artist, now a freelance gun coach and weapons armorer in Hollywood; film credits include Tombstone, L.A. Confidential, Blade, and Mr. & Mrs. Smith.
Syd Stembridge: Former owner of Stembridge Gun Rentals, founded in 1903; film credits include the Rambo series and Waterworld.
Mike Tristano: Owner and Founder of Mike Tristano & Co.; Credits include Top Shot and Triggers: Weapons That Changed the World
Jeremy E. Goldstein: Armorer, Prop Master, and military veteran. Jeremy is an active member of filmmaking Union Local 44. Film and TV credits include Medal of Honor, Friendsgiving, 3022, I Am Woman, S.W.A.T., and Called & Chosen.
Rick Washburn: Founder of Weapons Specialists, Inc.; film credits include The Godfather Part III, Cop Land, Godzilla, and Bad Company.
Keith Bray: Chief Operating Officer of Bray Armory; IMDb film credits include Dallas TV Show
Bryan W. Carpenter: owner of Full Flash Film Services New Orleans, Louisiana; Credits include: Jack Reacher: Never Go Back (tactical trainer), Roots (2016 miniseries) (key armorer), Zoo (key armorer)
Bill Davis: Founder of Tactical Edge Group; Film credits include Saw, Tremors 3: Back to Perfection, Scary Movie 4 and NCIS
Robert J. Riley: Founder of Midsouth Movie Armory; Credits include: "Doomsday Preppers"
Francis Smith: Owner of Weapon Specialist of Michigan; film credits include Red Dawn and Low Winter Sun series
Charlie Taylor: Founder of Movie Armaments Group; film credits include Suicide Squad, xXx The return of Xander Cage, Red, Robocop, Romeo + Juliet, The Boondock Saints, Assault On Precinct 13, and the Resident Evil series.


John Fox: Credits include Knowing and The Pacific

