Xenoarchaeology, branch of xenology dealing with extraterrestrial cultures, is a hypothetical form of archaeology that exists mainly in works of science fiction. The field is concerned with the study of material remains to reconstruct and interpret past life-ways of alien civilizations. Xenoarchaeology is not currently practiced by mainstream archaeologists due to the current lack of any material for the discipline to study.


The name derives from Greek xenos (ξένος) which means 'stranger, alien', and archaeology 'study of ancients'.
Xenoarchaeology is sometimes called astroarchaeology or exoarchaeology, although some would argue that the prefix exo- would be more correctly applied to the study of human activities in a space environment.Other names for xenoarchaeology, or specialised fields of interest, include Probe SETI (Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence), extraterrestrial archaeology, space archaeology, SETA (Search for Extra-Terrestrial Artifacts), Dysonian SETI, Planetary SETI, SETT (Search for Extra-Terrestrial Technology), SETV (Search for Extra-Terrestrial Visitation), extraterrestrial anthropology, areoarchaeology and selenoarchaeology.


It is arguably the case that, due to the immense distances between stars, any evidence we discover of extraterrestrial intelligence, whether it be an artifact or an electromagnetic signal, may come from a long-vanished civilization. Thus the entire SETI project can be seen as a form of archaeology.  Additionally, due to the extreme age of the universe, there may be a reasonable expectation for astrobiology research to produce evidence of extinct alien life prior to the discovery of alien life itself.The study of alien cultures might offer us glimpses into our own species' past or future development.Vicky Walsh argued for the existence of "exo-artifacts" using the principle of mediocrity and the Drake equation. She proposed that a theoretical and speculative field of archaeology be established in order to test outlandish claims, and to prepare for a time when undeniably extraterrestrial artifacts needed to be analysed. "If it is possible to construct an abstract archaeology that can be tested and refined on earth and then applied to areas beyond our planet, then the claims for ETI remains on the moon and Mars may really be evaluated in light of established archaeological theory and analysis".Ben McGee similarly proposed the creation of a set of interdisciplinary, proactive xenoarchaeological guidelines, arguing that identifying suspected artifacts of astrobiology is all that is required to justify establishing a methodology for xenoarchaeology.  He emphasized the necessity of proactive xenoarchaeological work in order to avoid future bias, mischaracterization, and information mismanagement, and he cites three scenarios under which such a methodology or set of guidelines would be useful, those being "remote sensing" of a potential xenoarchaeologial artifact, encountering an artifact during "human exploration,"  and "terrestrial interception" of an artifact.Greg Fewer has argued that archaeological techniques should be used to evaluate alleged UFO landing or crash sites, such as Roswell.


The origins of the field have been traced to theories about a hypothetical Martian civilization based on observations of what were perceived as canals on Mars. These theories, of which Percival Lowell was the most famous exponent, were apparently inspired by a mistranslation of a quote by Giovanni Schiaparelli.
The 1997 Theoretical Archaeology Group conference featured a session on "archaeology and science fiction".
The 2004 annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association featured a session Anthropology, Archaeology and Interstellar Communication.


Planetary SETI is concerned with the search for extraterrestrial structures on the surface of bodies in the Solar System. Claims for evidence of extraterrestrial artifacts can be divided into three groups, the Moon, Mars, and the other planets and their satellites.Examples of sites of interest include the "bridge" sighted in the Mare Crisium in 1953, and the "Blair Cuspids", "an unusual arrangement of seven spirelike objects of varying heights" at the western edge of the Mare Tranquillitatis, photographed by in Lunar Orbiter 2 on November 20, 1966. In 2006, Ian Crawford proposed that a search for alien artifacts be conducted on the Moon.Percival Lowell's mistaken identification of Martian canals was an early attempt to detect and study an alien culture from its supposed physical remains.  More recently, there was interest in the supposed Face on Mars.
The Society for Planetary SETI Research is a loose organization of researchers interested in this field. The organization does not endorse any particular conclusions drawn by its members on particular sites.



A great deal of research and writing has been done, and some searches conducted for extraterrestrial probes in the Solar System. This followed the work of Ronald N. Bracewell.
Robert Freitas, Christopher Rose and Gregory Wright have argued that interstellar probes can be a more energy-efficient means of communication than electromagnetic broadcasts.If so, a solarcentric Search for Extraterrestrial Artifacts (SETA) would seem to be favored over the more traditional radio or optical searches.
Robert A. Freitas coined the Term SETA in the 1980s.On the basis that the Earth-Moon or Sun-Earth libration orbits might constitute convenient parking places for automated extraterrestrial probes, unsuccessful searches were conducted by Freitas and Valdes.


In a 1960 paper, Freeman Dyson proposed the idea of a Dyson sphere, a type of extraterrestrial artifact able to be searched for and studied at interstellar distances. Following that paper, several searches have been conducted.In a 2005 paper, Luc Arnold proposed a means of detecting smaller, though still mega-scale, artifacts from their distinctive transit light curve signature. (see Astroengineering).


A subculture of enthusiasts studies purported structures on the Moon or Mars. These controversial "structures" (such as the Face on Mars) are not accepted as more than natural features by most scientists, examples of the pareidolia phenomenon.
Palaeocontact or ancient astronaut theories, espoused by Erich von Däniken and others, are further examples of fringe theories. These claim that the Earth was visited in prehistoric times by extraterrestrial beings.


Xenoarchaeological themes are common in science fiction. Works about the exploration of enigmatic extraterrestrial artifacts have been satirically categorized as Big Dumb Object stories.
Some of the more prominent examples of xenoarchaeological fiction include Arthur C. Clarke's novel Rendezvous with Rama, H. Beam Piper's short story Omnilingual, and Charles Sheffield's Heritage Universe series.
Jack McDevitt's science fiction novels often revolve around human or alien historical and archaeological mysteries.
Mass Effect's plot revolves around technologies in the form of structures, transportation, buildings and machines left behind by an extinct alien race.
The primary setting of Halo: Combat Evolved takes place on a massive structure created by an ancient, extinct alien super race. These structures feature prominently in the sequels Halo 2, Halo 3, and Halo 4.
In the video game "Borderlands", and its sequel "Borderlands 2", the Atlas corporation started mining the planet Pandora after finding evidence of an ancient material called Eridium. This material was supposedly created by extraterrestrial creatures or is a natural product of long-term planetary production.
In the video game "Stellaris", players can often find extraterrestrial artifacts from an extinct civilization before actually encountering native spaceborne creatures or other present-day extraterrestrial civilizations.


Gateway by Fred Pohl
Noon Universe by Strugatsky brothers.
2001: A Space Odyssey by Arthur C. Clarke
Rendezvous With Rama by Arthur C. Clarke
Wasteland Of Flint by Thomas Harlan
House of Reeds by Thomas Harlan
The Season of Passage by Christopher Pike
Broken Angels by Richard Morgan
Strata by Terry Pratchett
Revelation Space by Alastair Reynolds
Grass by Sheri S. Tepper
The Voyage of the Space Beagle by A. E. van Vogt
The Engines of God by Jack McDevitt
The Hercules Text by Jack McDevitt
The novels in the Heritage Universe by Charles Sheffield
The Past of Forever (Children of the Stars, Book 4) by Juanita Coulson
Saga of Seven Suns (Most notably Book 1: Hidden Empire) by Kevin J. Anderson
Heritage Trilogy by Ian Douglas
Ringworld (and its sequels) by Larry Niven
The Gaea Trilogy by John Varley
The Giants series by James P. Hogan


"Omnilingual" by H. Beam Piper
"The Sentinel" by Arthur C. Clarke
"At the Mountains of Madness" by H. P. Lovecraft
"The Vaults of Yoh-Vombis" by Clark Ashton Smith


Sid Meier's Alpha Centauri
Alien Legacy
Star Trek: A Final Unity
RAMA (based on Clarke's novel)
Freelancer
FreeSpace 
Wing Commander: Privateer
The Dig
Doom 3
Halo series
Mass Effect: Mysteries related to an extinct race known as the Protheans figure prominently in the plot and one of the characters you get in your party is a xenoarchaeologist. Also, it's a profitable business, giving rise to various "paleotechnological" companies recovering functioning devices, which are often superior to indigenous technology of the 22nd century.
Civilization: Call to Power
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic (Although the Star Wars saga doesn't take place in our Galaxy or the human timeframe; the game's main concept is discovering traces of an ancient stellar empire of unknown aliens that existed before the Galactic Republic)
Resistance
StarCraft series
Aliens vs. Predator
Aliens versus Predator
Dead Space
Borderlands
Metal Fatigue
Marathon 2: Durandal
The Lacuna Expanse: There are many buildings that were left behind on hundreds of thousands of planets by a mysterious species known only as "the Great Race".
Stellaris: Several missions and events in the game have the player's civilization investigating traces of ancient precursor civilizations as well as other civilizations that existed in the past.
Outer Wilds


Alien
Stargate
Doom
Total Recall
Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull
Alien vs. Predator
Prometheus
Destination: Outer Space features a robot that visited Earth over two thousand years ago.
Forbidden Planet


Babylon 5
Star Trek
Stargate
Doctor Who
Stargate SG-1 and its spinoff Stargate Atlantis
Martian Chronicles, Ray Bradbury

