Arabian Ranches is a premium gated villa community in Dubai, United Arab Emirates launched in 2004. Located on Sheikh Mohammad Bin Zayed Road and in proximity to Dubai's Global Village. It includes the Arabian Ranches Golf Club, Dubai Equestrian & Polo Club.
Arabian Ranches 2 was introduced in 2012. Located 9 km inland, off the Al Qudra Road and consists of eleven village-style communities which will be is due to be completed by 2021.Arabian Ranches 3 was Introduce in 2019 Luxury Viilas in gated that will feature 7.5-acre central park.


Arabian Ranches 1, a desert-themed development occupies 1,650 acres including a championship golf course with over 20 different types of communities.Arabian Ranches 2 spans over 1.5 Million square meters of land consisting of several individual communities. Architects working on the project include Bassenian Lagoni, Melzer Decker & Ruder Architects , and LCRA Architects
Arabian Ranches 3, is the last phase of Arabian Ranches it will feature three and four-bedroom townhouses. located Next To Global village The new master-planned community promises to offer a “happy lifestyle” with a central park spanning an area of over 30,000 square metres, or about 7.5 acres.
It will also feature a four-kilometre boulevard, some community parks with an extensive choice of play areas for children, as well as wellness and sports facilities for all.
The lush-green neighbourhood will also feature a lazy river, some cycling tracks, a retail strip, a clubhouse and community centre, a mosque as well as schools and healthcare facilities in close proximity.


The residential core of Arabian Ranches 1 is composed of over 4,000 villas & townhouses, while Arabian Ranches 2 will be composed of over 1,724 themed villas and townhouses.The residential aspect of the development is supported by a variety of retail, leisure, and entertainment developments.




Arabian Ranches Shopping Centre is a regional shopping centre located in Arabian Ranches 1. It houses 20 retail outlets, a mosque, and a healthcare centre.


The Ranches Souk is a regional shopping centre located in Arabian Ranches 2. It houses over 35 retail units spread over two floors. Businesses currently operating in the shopping centre include Carrefour, Virgin Megastore, Claires, Mothercare, Sketchers, Early Learning Centre, Holland & Barrett, Al Jaber, Bin Sina Pharmacy, The Body Shop, Pet's Delight and Sun & Sand etc. Food and beverage retailers include Coldstone Creamery, Caribou Coffee, Carluccio's, Chez Sushi, Leila, McDonald's, Paul and Bateel Café. Arcade and amusement games are situated at Magic Planet.




Opened in February 2004, the 18-hole, 72 par course was designed by Ian Baker-Finch in association with Nicklaus Design. In 2014, a 2-year enhancement project was completed.


The Arabian Ranches development is home to an Andalusian-style Equestrian Centre specialising in services and events that include polo, show jumping and horseback trail riding in the desert.




The Arabian Ranches 1&2 development is home to Jumeirah English Speaking School and Ranches Primary School. These offer primary and secondary education, orientated towards the National British Curriculum. It also offers a post-secondary International Baccalaureate Diploma course.

