Brother (Russian: Брат, translit. Brat) is a 1997 Russian crime film directed by Aleksei Balabanov. The film stars Sergei Bodrov Jr. as Danila Bagrov, a young Russian ex-conscript. It appeared in the Un Certain Regard section at the 1997 Cannes Film Festival. After its release on VHS in June 1997, Brother unexpectedly became one of the most commercially successful Russian films of the 1990s and quickly rose to cult film status throughout Russia. Due to the film's popularity and fan demand, a sequel, Brother 2, was released in 2000. Brother 2 is notable for having a significantly higher budget, placing more emphasis on action sequences, and being set in Moscow and Chicago.


In the autumn of 1997, Danila Bagrov (Sergei Bodrov Jr.) returns to his small hometown of Priozersk following his demobilization from the Russian Army after the First Chechen War. On his way home, he ends up in a fight with security guards, after he accidentally walks onto the set of a music video for the band Nautilus Pompilius. He is arrested and brought to the local militsiya precinct. The officer in charge releases Danila on the condition that he will find another job within a week. After Danila arrives home his mother, very concerned for Danila, insists that he go to St. Petersburg to meet up with his successful older brother Viktor and ask for his help.
Danila travels to St. Petersburg, but his attempts to make contact with Viktor are unsuccessful. Instead, he wanders around the city. He befriends Kat (Mariya Zhukova), an energetic drug addict, and "The German" Hoffman (Yury Kuznetsov), a homeless street vendor whom Danila helps after a thug attempts to extort him.
Unbeknown to their mother, Viktor (Viktor Sukhorukov) is an accomplished hitman who goes by the street name "The Tatar" but is growing too independent and is starting to irritate his mob boss "Roundhead" (Sergei Murzin). His latest target is "The Chechen," a Chechen mafia boss who was recently released from prison and now runs a market. Roundhead, who is unhappy with the amount of money that Viktor demanded for the hit, orders his thugs to watch him in secret.
Danila eventually manages to find Viktor in his apartment. To avoid exposure, Viktor passes his assignment to his brother, gives him money to settle into the city, and then lies to him that the Chechen has been extorting from him, and asks Danila to perform the hit. Danila asks the German to find him a room in a communal flat in the city center. He then makes a makeshift silencer out of a plastic soda bottle and an oil filter, as well as a decoy firecracker out of a matchbox. Finally, he follows the Chechen and, despite the latter's security, takes him out without being spotted. As Danila makes his exit, Roundhead's thugs spot him and chase him. Making his escape, Danila jumps into a freight tram and, despite being wounded in the abdomen, manages to kill one of the pursuing thugs.
The tram driver, a woman named Sveta (Svetlana Pismichenko), helps Danila escape. Danila later recovers and meets up with Sveta. Despite Sveta being married, the two begin an affair. With the money given to him by Viktor after the hit, he begins to enjoy St. Petersburg, gives his provincial image a makeover, goes to a concert with Sveta, and manages to scare away her husband. He meets up with Kat to go to a nightclub and then smokes cannabis in an afterparty. The night ends with him sleeping with Kat.
Meanwhile, Roundhead is angry about losing one of his men and the fact that Viktor used someone else to carry out the hit. He decides to draw him into a combined raid. Once again Viktor, suspecting a trap, passes the job to Danila. The two thugs raid the apartment, but their main target is away. While they wait, in an apartment on the floor above, a party is taking place with several well-known Russian rock musicians. A young radio director, Stepan (Andrey Fedortsov) mistakes the raided flat for the party flat and is almost killed by the thugs, who take him captive. Vyacheslav Butusov, the lead singer of Nautilus Pompilius, makes the same mistake, but Danila instead follows Butusov to the party above and relaxes in the friendly musical atmosphere. After spending time at the party, he comes back downstairs and finds that the thugs have just killed their primary target, and are about to do the same with Stepan. Instead, Danila kills both thugs. Danila and Stepan drag the corpses to the Smolensky Lutheran Cemetery, where the German helps Danila dispose of the bodies.
Roundhead is furious upon finding out what happened. Instead of going after Viktor, he decides to track Danila and intercepts Sveta's tram. They later raid her apartment, where his men beat and rape her, and learn his phone number, as well as his address. A henchman nicknamed "Mole" ambushes Danila near his apartment building, but Danila manages to kill Mole. Realizing that staying home is unsafe, he travels to Sveta's house and is shocked at her state. He learns that Roundhead was responsible and realizes that the only way they could have tracked Sveta was when he returned a phone call from her home telephone to his brother.
At the same time, Roundhead raids Viktor's apartment and forces him to call Danila at gunpoint, so that he comes to pick up his payment. Realizing the depth of the situation, Danila goes back to the communal room that he was renting, buys a rifle from his landlord, converts it into a sawed-off shotgun, and replaces the duck-hunting pellets with nailheads. At Viktor's apartment, he takes out Roundhead and two of his henchmen and tells the surviving thug to warn the rest of the gang that he will kill anyone who hurts his brother. In reply, the thug tells him that it was Viktor who turned him in.
Danila forgives his brother, gives him some of the money from Roundhead's suitcase, and then tells him to return home and to work for the militsiya. Danila decides to go to Moscow. He visits Sveta, intending to take her with him, but her husband has returned and is beating her, demanding to know where Danila is. Seeing Danila, he challenges him to a fight, but before he can come closer, Danila fires a shot into his leg. Sveta rushes to her husband and begins to treat his wound. Danila urges her to leave with him, but she tells him to get out and never come back. He then meets up with the German, converses with him about the influence of the city on its residents, saying that everyone is weak here, to which the German replies that the city is an evil force that drains the strength from those who enter it. Danila offers him money, but the German declines, saying "What's good for the Russian is death for the German." Before he leaves the city, he finds Kat to say goodbye. She is indifferent to his departure, but he gives her money nonetheless.
The last scene of the film shows Danila walking out of a snow-covered forest. He hitches a ride to Moscow on a passing truck. As he chats with the driver, the final shot is of the winter road stretching far into the wilderness.


Sergei Bodrov Jr. – Danila Bagrov
Viktor Sukhorukov – Viktor Bagrov
Svetlana Pismichenko – Sveta
Mariya Zhukova – Kat
Yuri Kuznetsov – "The German" Hoffman
Irina Rakshina - Zinka
Sergei Murzin – Roundhead
Andrey Fyodortsov – Stepan
Igor Shibanov – MilitiamanThe film also features brief appearances from several Russian rock musicians, including:

Vyacheslav Butusov, as well as other members of Nautilus Pompilius
Sergey Chigrakov
Nastya Poleva
Band members of Aquarium
Band members of Kolibri


Aleksei Balabanov – director, screenwriter
Sergei Astakhov – camera operator
Vladimir Kartashov - production designer
Nadezhda Vasilyeva – costumer
Vyacheslav Butusov – composer
Sergei Selyanov – producer


The entire filming process took place within 31 days, on a small budget of approximately $10,000. The actors worked for little to no pay, and due to the low budget, they wore their own clothes on set throughout most of the film. Some clothing was bought second-hand on flea markets, such as Danila's sweater that he wears throughout most of the film. Most of the film was shot in St. Petersburg, on Vasilyevsky Island. The first six minutes of the film were set in Danila's hometown, which was filmed in Priozersk, with the scene where Danila walks onto a film set taking place outside the walls of Korela Fortress. 
Svetlana Pismichenko, for her role as Sveta, learned how to operate a tram. During the filming of the scene where Sveta's husband, Pavel, is shot in the leg by Danila, the actor, Vladimir Yermilov, was wounded in the leg due to an accident with the pyrotechnics. Before the filming of the last scene, where Danila hitchhikes on a truck, the crew realized that none of the actors know how to operate a truck. Because of this, Sergei Astakhov, the film's camera operator, played a brief role as the truck driver. The film was released on VHS in June 1997 and premiered on television on 12 December 1997.


After the success of the film, Alexey Balabanov began writing a script for two sequels. Brother 2 was supposed to take place in Moscow, and Brother 3 in America. However, it was decided to abandon this idea and combine the two parts into one whole film.




Russian singer-songwriter Monetochka (Elizabeth Andreevna Gyrdymova, born in 1998, Russian Wikipedia) reproduces scenes from this movie in the 2018 music video to her song «90» (the nineties).


MacKay, John. Balabanov's Brother (1997): Cinema as salvage operation.
Österberg, Ira (2018). What Is That Song? Aleksej Balabanov’s Brother and Rock as Film Music in Russian Cinema (Ph.D. thesis). University of Helsinki. ISBN 978-951-51-4124-8.
Weinhold, Florian (2013). Path of Blood: The Post-Soviet Gangster, His Mistress and Their Others in Aleksei Balabanov's Genre Films, pp. 39–65. Reaverlands Books, North Charleston, SC.

