Christmas in the Philippines (Filipino: Pasko sa Pilipinas), one of two predominantly Catholic countries in Asia (the other one being East Timor), is one of the biggest holidays in the island. The country celebrates the world's longest Christmas season, with Christmas carols heard as early as September and lasting variously until either Epiphany, the Feast of the Black Nazarene on January 9, or the Feast of the Santo Niño on the third Sunday of January. The official observance by the Catholic Church in the Philippines is from the beginning of the Simbang Gabi on December 16 until the Feast of the Epiphany on the first Sunday of the year.
Every year, Filipinos from around the world mark September 1 as the beginning of the countdown to Christmas. This countdown, which spans from September to December, otherwise known as the "Ber Months", is one of the most important traditions that makes the world's earliest and longest timespan of a Christmas season.
The Christmas season gradually starts from September to December and ends in the third or fourth week of January. It is celebrated for almost half a year (4 months and 3–4 weeks). Generally, holiday decorations are available as early as the National Heroes' Day weekend in August. But for the Iglesia Filipina Independiente or Aglipayans, Christmas starts at eve of December 24 and ends January 5.


The various ethnic groups in the Philippines each observe different Christmas traditions, and the following are generally common.


In urban areas like Metro Manila, many offices organise Christmas parties. These are usually held during the second week of December, or right before schools and universities go on holiday. Common activities include Monito/Monita (Kris Kringle), musical or theatrical performances and parlor games. Food is provided either through potluck, or via a pool of contributions to buy food. Some have fireworks displays, but it was banned today due to nationwide Firecracker Ban. Similar events are held by schools and universities nationwide.


Simbang Gabi ("Night Mass"; Spanish: Misa de Gallo, "Rooster's Mass", or Misa de Aguinaldo, "Gift Mass") is a novena of dawn Masses from December 16–24 (Christmas Eve). The Simbang Gabi is practised mainly by Catholic and Aglipayans, with some Evangelical Christian and independent Protestant churches having adopted the practise of having pre-Christmas dawn services. Attending the Masses is meant to show devotion to God and heightened anticipation for Christ's birth, and folk belief holds that God grants the special wish of a devotee that hears all nine Masses.
Morning observance of Simbang Gabi this holiday begins as early as 03:00 PST, while in some parishes, anticipated Masses begin the previous evening at 20:00 PST or as early as 19:30 PST in others. After hearing Mass, Catholic families buy traditional Filipino holiday fare for breakfast outside the church and eat it either within the church precincts or at home. Vendors offer many native delicacies, including bibingka (rice flour and egg-based cake, cooked using coal burners above and under); putò bumbóng (a purple, sticky rice delicacy steamed in bamboo tubes, buttered then sprinkled with brown sugar and shredded dried coconut meat). Drinks include coffee, salabát (ginger tea) and tsokolate (thick, Spanish-style hot chocolate). Some Aglipayan churches invite the congregation to partake of the "paínit" (literally, "heater"), a post-Mass snack of mostly rice pastries served with coffee or cocoa at the house of the Mass sponsor. The bibingka and putò bumbóng are also served to those attending the anticipated evening Masses together with dinner.


For Filipinos, Christmas Eve ("Bisperas ng Pasko") on December 24 is celebrated with the Midnight Mass, and the traditional Noche Buena feast. Family members dine together at around midnight on traditional yuletide fare, which includes: queso de bola (Filipino Spanish for "ball of cheese", which is made of edam sealed in red paraffin wax); tsokoláte, noodles and pasta, fruit salad, pandesal, relleno and hamón (Christmas ham). Some families would also open presents at this time.


In different provinces and schools, the journey of Joseph and the pregnant Virgin Mary in search of lodging is re-enacted. The pageant, traditionally called the "Panunulúyan", "Pananawágan", or "Pananapátan", is modelled after the Spanish Las Posadas.
The Panunulúyan is performed after dark, with the actors portraying Joseph and the Virgin Mary going to pre-designated houses. They perform a chant meant to rouse the "owners of the house" (also actors) to request for lodging. The owners then cruelly turn them away, sometimes also in song, saying that their house is already filled with other guests. Finally, Joseph and Mary make their way to the parish church where a replica of the stable has been set up. The birth of Jesus is celebrated at midnight with the Misa de Gallo.


Christmas Day in the Philippines is primarily a family affair. The Misa de Gallo is celebrated on December 25 and is usually one of several Masses that all family members (including non-churchgoers) are present. The Misa de Gallo is often celebrated between 10 pm and midnight, a schedule preferred by many Filipinos who stay up late on Christmas Eve for the night-long celebration of the Noche Buena.
Preferably in the morning, Filipinos typically visit their extended family, especially to pay their respects to senior relatives. This custom of giving respect is enacted through the "Págmamáno". A supplicant takes the back of an elder's hand and presses it against the forehead, while giving the greeting, Máno, pô (lit. "[Thy] hand, please"). The elder often responds by reciting a blessing or simply acknowledging the gesture, and in return gives "Aguinaldo" or money in the form of crisp banknotes, often placed in a sealed envelope such as an ang pao. Godparents in particular are socially obligated to give presents or aguinaldo to their godchildren, to whom they often give larger amounts compared to other younger relatives.
A festive lunch may follow the "Págmamáno". The menu is heavily dependent upon the finances of the family, with richer families preparing grand feasts, while poorer families choose to cook simple yet special dishes. Some families choose to open presents on this day after the lunch.
When nighttime falls, members of the family usually return home or linger to drink, play parlour games, and chat. Some may opt to have another feast for dinner, while a minority spend the entire day at home to rest after the previous days' festivities.


Holy Innocents' Day or Childermas is commemorated on December 28 as Niños Inocentes. Filipinos once celebrated the day by playing practical jokes on one another, similar to April Fool's Day. One of the widely practised pranks on this day is to borrow money without the intention of paying back.  Creditors are usually helpless in getting remuneration from borrower, and are instead forewarned not to lend money on this day. Victims of such pranks were once called out, "Na-Niños Inocentes ka!"


On  December 31 (Bisperas ng Bagong Taón), Filipino families gather for the Media Noche a lavish midnight feast that supposedly symbolises their hopes for prosperity in the coming year, and lasts until the following morning as with the Noche Buena taken on Christmas Eve.
Filipinos make noise both to greet the New Year and in the belief that the din exorcises their surroundings of malevolent spirits. In spite of the yearly ban (due to the national government restrictions), people in most towns and cities customarily light firecrackers, or employ safer methods of merrymaking such as banging on pots and pans and blowing car horns.
Other traditions and beliefs include encouraging children to jump at the stroke of midnight to increase their height; displaying circular fruit such as oranges; wearing clothes with dots and other circular designs to symbolise coins and money; eating twelve grapes at midnight for good luck in the twelve months of the year (a Spanish custom); and opening all windows and doors to let in the blessings on the first day of the year.


Christmas officially ends on the Feast of the Epiphany, more commonly known as Three Kings' Day (Spanish: Día de los Tres Reyes; Tagalog: Araw ng Tatlóng Harì). The Iglesia Filipina Independiente or Aglipayans emphasized that the feast of the Epiphany officially ends the Christmas season.
A dying tradition is the Hispanic custom of children leaving their shoes out by the window or the door, so that the Three Kings can leave small gifts like candy or money inside upon their descent on Twelfth Night.


Since 2011, the Catholic Church mandated that the Christmas season ends on the Feast of the Baptism of Jesus, kept on either the Monday after Epiphany or the second Sunday of the year. However, for the Iglesia Filipina Independiente or Aglipayans the Christmas season which begins on the eve of December 24 ends on 5 January.
The miraculous Black Nazarene, whose cult is centred in Manila and Cagayan de Oro, is borne in procession on January 9 after a novena in its honour. The date commemorates the image's 1787 traslación (solemn transfer) from its original location in what is now Rizal Park to its present shrine in the Quiapo District of the city.


The latest date for the end of popular Christmas celebrations is the Feast of the Santo Niño (Christ Child) on the third Sunday of January. The image depiction most associated with this day is the purportedly miraculous Santo Niño de Cebú, the first Christian icon brought to the islands. In 1521, Ferdinand Magellan came to Cebú and gave the image as a present to Humamay, chief consort of the local monarch, Raja Humabon, when she, together with her husband and a number of his subjects, were baptised into the Catholic faith. Tradition holds that Humamay—who received the Christian name Juana after Joan of Castile—danced for joy upon receiving the Santo Niño, providing a legendary origin for the fervent religious dancing during the Sinulog held in honor of the Christ Child. Celebrations are mostly focused in Cebu, where the Sinulog Festival is held, while there are other celebrations held nationwide in its honor, including the Ati-Atihan Festival in Aklan Province, the Dinagyang in Ilolio, the Kahimunan in Butuan, and the feasts of the Holy Child in the districts of Tondo and Pandacan in Manila. The National Cathedral or the Central Church of the Iglesia Filipina Independiente or Aglipayans is dedicated to the Santo Niño and other several parishes and missions around the country.


In older traditions (which are still kept in the liturgical calendar of the Extraordinary Form of the Mass) Christmas lasted until Candlemas, or the Feast of the Purification of Mary and the Presentation of the Baby Jesus at the Temple. This marked the end of a long 40-day "Christmastide" corresponding to the 40 days of Lent. This date falls on February 2, after Mary had participated in a rite of purification in according to the ancient Candlemas festival rooted in Halakha (Jewish law). This is also when Simeon makes his well-known prophecy to Mary and Joseph about the Holy Child, of Jesus being a light for the Gentiles. Many parishes, if possible will still keep their nativity scenes displayed up until the celebration of the Presentation of the Lord on February 2.This final salvo is marked by the Feast of Our Lady of the Candles in Jaro, Iloilo City, where the image is enshrined in the Jaro Cathedral, the National Shrine of Our Lady of the Candles, where Tridentine Masses are celebrated in commemoration. Similar celebrations are held nationwide in towns where Our Lady of the Candles is its patroness, including Candelaria, Quezon, whose town fiesta is celebrated on this date.


Due to Americanisation, decorations such as Santa Claus, Christmas trees, tinsel, faux evergreens, reindeer, and snow have become popular.
Christmas lights are strung about in festoons, as the tail of the Star of Bethlehem in Belens, star shapes, Christmas trees, angels, and in a large variety of other ways, going as far as draping the whole outside of the house in lights. Despite these, the Philippines still retains its traditional decorations.



Every Christmas season, Filipino homes and buildings are adorned with star-shaped lanterns, called paról from the Spanish farol, meaning "lantern" or "lamp". These lanterns represent the Star of Bethlehem that guided the Magi, also known as the Three Kings (Tagalog: Tatlóng Harì). Parol are as beloved and iconic to Filipinos as Christmas trees are to Westerners.
The most common form of the lantern is a 5-pointed star with two "tails" at the lower two tips. Other popular variations are four, eight, and ten-pointed stars, while rarer ones sport six, seven, nine, and more than twelve points. The earliest parols were made from simple materials like bamboo, Japanese rice paper (known as "papél de Hapón") or crêpe paper, and were lit by a candle or coconut oil lamp. Simple parols can be easily constructed with just ten bamboo sticks, paper, and glue. Present-day parol has endless possible shapes and forms and is made of a variety of materials, such as cellophane, plastic, rope, capiz shell, glass, and even recycled refuse. Parol-making is a folk craft, and many Filipino children often craft them as a school project or for leisure.
The Giant Lantern Festival is an annual festival held the Saturday before Christmas Eve in the San Fernando City, Pampanga. The festival features a competition of giant lanterns, and the popularity of the festival, has earned the city the moniker, "Christmas Capital of the Philippines".



Another traditional Filipino Christmas symbol is the belén—a creche or tableau depicting the Birth of Christ. Derived from the Spanish name for Bethlehem, Belén, it depicts the infant Jesus in the manger, surrounded by the Virgin Mary, St. Joseph, the shepherds, their flock, the Magi and some stable animals, and is surmounted by an angel, the Star or both.
Belén can be seen in homes, churches, schools and even office buildings; the ones on office buildings can be extravagant, using different materials for the figures and using Christmas lights, parols for the Star, and painted background scenery. A notable outdoor belén in Metro Manila is the one that used to be at the COD building in Cubao, Quezon City. In 2003, the belén was transferred to the Greenhills Shopping Center in San Juan when the COD building closed down. This belén is a lights and sounds presentation, the story being narrated over speakers set up and most probably using automatons to make the figures move up and down, or turn, etc. Each year, the company owning it changes the theme from the Nativity Story, with variations such as a fairground story, and Santa Claus' journey.
Tarlac City, Tarlac is known as the "Belén Capital of the Philippines" holds the annual "Belenísmo sa Tarlac". It is a belén-making contest which is participated by establishments and residents in Tarlac. Giant versions of the belén with different themes are displayed in front of the establishments and roads of Tarlac for the entire season.


In the Philippines, children in small groups go from house to house singing Christmas carols, which they called pangangaroling. Makeshift instruments include tambourines made with tansans (aluminum bottle caps) strung on a piece of wire. With the traditional chant of "Namamasko po!", these carolers wait expectantly for the homeowners to reward them with coins. Afterward, the carolers thank the generous homeowners by singing "Thank you, thank you, ang babait ninyo (you are so kind), thank you!"
An example of a traditional Filipino carol is a part of series known as "Maligayang Pasko", which is commonly called "Sa maybahay ang aming bati".


This is a word heard repeatedly during the Christmas Season in the Philippines. Presently, the term is interpreted as gift or money received from benefactors. Aguinaldo is a Spanish term for bonus. Its prevalent use may have originated from Filipino workers of the Spanish era, receiving extra pay from the generosity of the rich employers during the celebration of the Christmas season.




The first two Christmas dramas in Philippine television are Sana Ngayong Pasko (aired in 2009) and Jillian: Namamasko Po (aired in 2010), both originally produced by GMA Network. Both of them aired on the same channel.



The popular OPM Christmas songs and carols are performed by the OPM artists and chorale groups. OPM Christmas carols and songs are also played on the radio airwaves most likely on FM every November and December, but begin as early as September 1.
Among the most popular Christmas songs are "Christmas In Our Hearts" by Jose Mari Chan, "Kumukutikutitap" by Joey Albert, "Sana Ngayong Pasko" by Ariel Rivera, "Pasko Na, Sinta Ko" and "Miss Kita Kung Christmas". Yearly Christmas songs produced by the TV network ABS-CBN, particularly recent ones such as "Star ng Pasko", "Thank You Ang Babait Ninyo", "Thank You for the Love", "Just Love" and "Family Is Love" have also garnered widespread critical and commercial acclaim.
On November 11, 2014 an OPM Christmas Charity song entitled "Sa Pagsapit Ng Pasko" (When Christmas Comes) was released under Ivory Music and Video. The song is dedicated to all Typhoon Haiyan victims performed by various indie and labeled Filipino artists.
The popular OPM Christmas carols and songs are:

12 Days of Pinoy Krismas by APO Hiking Society
Annual Christmas Station IDs songs by ABS-CBN (TV network)
Ang Pasko ay Sumapit (Traditional)
Araw Araw Ay Pasko by Willie Revillame
Boom Tarat Tarat (Christmas version) by Willie Revillame
Buong Pusong MaGMAhalan Ngayong Pasko by GMA Network
Christmas Bonus by Aegis
Christmas in Our Hearts by Jose Mari Chan
Christmas Wish by Willie Revillame
Christmas Won't Be the Same Without You by Martin Nievera
Da Best ang Pasko ng Pilipino by Maria Aragon
Everyday is Christmas Day by Itchyworms
Family is Love by ABS-CBN
A Perfect Christmas by Jose Mari Chan
Himig ng Pasko by APO Hiking Society
Hai Duñia Gembiralah (Ilocano Traditional)
Hele ni Inay by Gary Valenciano
Ipadama Ang Puso ng Pasko by GMA Network
Isang Pamilya Tayo Ngayong Pasko by ABS-CBN
Just Love Ngayong Christmas by ABS-CBN
Kampana ng Simbahan by Leo Valdez
Krismas Mas Mas Masaya by Sharon Cuneta
Kumukutikutitap by Joey Albert
Lumiliwanag ang Mundo sa Kwento ng Pasko by ABS-CBN
Macho Na Si Santa by Masculados
Magic ng Pasko by Julie Anne San Jose
Magkasama Tayo sa Kwento ng Pasko
MaGMAhalan Tayo Ngayong Pasko by Alden Richards
Mano Po Ninong, Mano Po Ninang by Janet Arnaiz
Mas Liligaya Ang Pasko by Coco Martin with Shernan, Smugglaz, Zaito and Bassilyo
May Katuparan ang Hiling sa Kapamilyang Kapiling by Sarah Geronimo
Miss Kita Kung Christmas by Sharon Cuneta
Nakaraang Pasko by Kuh Ledesma
Ngayong Pasko, Magniningning ang Pilipino by Toni Gonzaga and Gary Valenciano with the UST Singers
Noche Buena by Marco Sison
Pasko Na Naman (Words by Levi Celerio and Music by Felipe P. de Leon)
O Dungga Man Ninyo by Ilonggo Christmas song
O Senor San Jose by Ilonggo Christmas song
Pasko Na! by Bayani Agbayani
Pasko Na Naman by Ramon Jacinto
Pasko Na, Sinta Ko by Gary Valenciano
Pasko Para Sa Lahat by OPM Various Artists
Pasko sa Pinas by Yeng Constantino
Pasko sa Puso Ko by Ogie Alcasid
Sa Araw ng Pasko by OPM Various Artists
Sa Pagsapit ng Pasko by OPM Various Artists
Sa Pasko by Daniel Magtira
Sa Paskong Darating by Celeste Legaspi
Sa Paskong Darating by Freddie Aguilar
Sama-Sama Tayo Pasalove Ngayong Pasko by Aicelle Santos
Sana Ngayong Pasko by Ariel Rivera
Share The Love, Share the Joy it's Christmas Time! by Julie Anne San Jose
Silent Night Na Naman by Ariel Rivera
Sino si Santa Claus? by Florante
Star ng Pasko by ABS-CBN
Thank You Ang Babait Ninyo by The Voice Kids Top 4
Thank You for the Love by ABS-CBN
Tuloy Na Tuloy Pa Rin ang Pasko by APO Hiking Society
Unang Pasko by Willie Revillame
Wowowillie Christmas by Willie Revillame

