A mashup (also mesh, mash up, mash-up, blend, bootleg) is a creative work, usually in a form of a song, created by blending two or more pre-recorded songs, usually by overlaying the vocal track of one song seamlessly over the instrumental track of another. To the extent that such works are "transformative" of original content, in the United States they may find protection from copyright claims under the "fair use" doctrine of copyright law.


The 1990 John Zorn album Naked City features a version of Ornette Coleman's "Lonely Woman" set over the bassline of Roy Orbison's "Pretty Woman".In 1994, the experimental band Evolution Control Committee released the first modern mashup tracks on their hand-made cassette album, Gunderphonic. These "Whipped Cream Mixes" combined a pair of Public Enemy a cappellas with instrumentals by Herb Alpert and the Tijuana Brass. First released on home-made cassettes in early 1992, it was later pressed on 7" vinyl, and distributed by Eerie Materials in the mid-1990s. The tracks gained some degree of notoriety on college radio stations in the United States.The name Pop Will Eat Itself was taken from an NME feature on the band Jamie Wednesday, written by David Quantick, which proposed the theory that because popular music simply recycles good ideas continuously, the perfect pop song could be written by combining the best of those ideas into one track. Hence, Pop Will Eat Itself.The mashup movement gained momentum again in 2001 with the release of the 2 Many DJs album As Heard on Radio Soulwax Pt. 2 by Soulwax's Dewaele brothers, which combined 45 different tracks; the same year a remix of Christina Aguilera's "Genie in a Bottle" was also released by Freelance Hellraiser, which coupled the pop star with the raucous guitars of "Hard To Explain" by New York's The Strokes in an infectious concoction entitled "A Stroke of Genie-us".Launched in San Francisco in 2003, Bootie was the first club night in the United States dedicated solely to the burgeoning art form of the bootleg mashup, and now hosts monthly parties in several cities around the globe, including Los Angeles, Paris, Boston, Munich, and New York City. The party's slogan, "Music for the A.D.D. Generation" also inspired the creation of "A.D.D", Israel's first mash-up dedicated party. The Best of Bootie mashup compilation series is compiled and produced each year by A Plus D, creators of the international mashup club Bootie. The compilations have been released in December every year since 2005, and are annual Internet sensations, with each album garnering over 5000GB+ of downloads.


Albums by A-Trak2007: Dirty South DanceAlbums by Girl Talk2003: Unstoppable
2006: Night Ripper
2008: Feed the Animals
2010: All DayAlbums by The Kleptones2003: Yoshimi Battles the Hip-Hop Robots (rappers over The Flaming Lips' Yoshimi Battles the Pink Robots)
2004: A Night at the Hip Hopera (rappers over Queen)
2010: Uptime / DowntimeAlbums by Max Tannone2009: Jaydiohead
2009: Doublecheck Your Head
2010: Mos Dub
2010: Dub KweliAlbums by wait what2010: the notorious xxAlbums by TenDJiz2011: De La Soulviet – De La Soul with Soviet soul and jazz
2012: Commonasm – Common and Nas with Soviet soul and jazz Albums by Neil Cicierega

2014: Mouth Sounds
2014: Mouth Silence
2017: Mouth MoodsOther notable albums and individual tracksThe 1997 version of "People Hold On" is a blend of the vocals from the original 1989 hit by Lisa Stansfield and the backing track from the 1997 UK Number One hit "Professional Widow" by Tori Amos.
In 2003 Dannii Minogue was subject to two mashups, the first being "Begin to Spin Around" by using the vocals from her hit single "I Begin to Wonder" and the backing from "You Spin Me Round (Like a Record)" by Dead or Alive, and the second being "Don't Wanna Lose This Groove", using vocals from her song "Don't Wanna Lose This Feeling" and the back from "Into the Groove" by Madonna.
At the 2002 Brit Awards ceremony, Kylie Minogue performed "Can't Get Blue Monday Out of My Head" a mashup of "Can't Get You Out Of My Head" and "Blue Monday".
The American Edit album by Dean Gray (a collaboration between Party Ben and Team9) was based on the album American Idiot by Green Day and carried the original version of one of the most well-known mashups, "Boulevard of Broken Songs".
"Toca's Miracle" by Fragma – mashup of Coco Star's "I Need a Miracle" and Fragma's "Toca Me".
The Grey Album by Danger Mouse (2004) – mashup of Jay Z's The Black Album with The Beatles' The White Album
"Doctor Pressure" originally created by Phil 'n' Dog in 2004, eventually released by Mylo in 2005.
"Numb/Encore" by Linkin Park & Jay Z, the most popular of the six mash-ups on their album Collision Course. The song was a hit amongst radio stations and eventually went on to win a Grammy.
"Love" by the Beatles (for the Cirque du Soleil show Love) in 2006.
"Everyday Chemistry", a mashup album consisting of several separate solo Beatles songs to make one album credited to The Beatles.
"My California Gurl"  The X Factor group Emblem3 performed a three-way mashup of "My Girl" by The Temptations, "California Gurls" by Katy Perry and Snoop Dogg, and "What Makes You Beautiful" by One Direction. The song consists of two verses and the refrain from "My Girl" and the main chorus from "California Gurls", plus an original rap verse set to the backing track of "What Makes You Beautiful".

