Newsround (stylized as newsround, originally called John Craven's Newsround before his departure in 1989) is a BBC children's news programme, which has run continuously since 4 April 1972. It was one of the world's first television news magazines aimed specifically at children. Initially commissioned as a short series by BBC Children's Department, who held editorial control, its facilities were provided by BBC News. The programme is aimed at 6 to 10 year olds.


Originally known as John Craven's Newsround, it was mostly presented by John Craven between 4 April 1972 and 22 June 1989. Originally, stand-in presenters, such as Richard Whitmore, came from the main BBC News bulletins and Huw Edwards presented in 2005.
The programme gradually developed its own presentation team, including Roger Finn and Helen Rollason, with Craven in the dual role of chief presenter and programme editor. For most of its first two decades, Newsround drew upon the BBC's network of national and international correspondents such as John Humphrys, Michael Buerk and Martin Bell. The programme gradually developed its own small reporting team, including Lucy Mathen, Paul McDowell and long-serving space editor Reg Turnill.
Shortly before Craven's departure, the show was renamed Newsround, and was then presented by a rotating team including Juliet Morris, Krishnan Guru-Murthy, Julie Etchingham, Chris Rogers, Kate Sanderson, Matthew Price and Becky Jago. Regular reporters on the programme, who have also presented it, included Paul Welsh, Lizo Mzimba and Terry Baddoo.
The distinctive opening theme used for the first fifteen years of the programme was not composed especially for it, but is instead the opening eight bars of a 1968 cover of "Johnny One Note" by Ted Heath and his Music. The closing sting used the last couple of bars of "New Worlds" by John Baker, recorded by the BBC Radiophonic Workshop.
Newsround updated its opening in May 1987, with computer graphics, although this look was originally planned for January 1987. In September 1990, a space look was introduced. The multi-coloured look appeared in January 1994, with further updates taking place on 1 September 1997, 11 February 2002, 30 May 2006, and 13 October 2008.
Newsround was the first British television programme to break the news of the loss of the Space Shuttle Challenger on  28 January 1986. This edition was presented by Roger Finn, who had only recently joined the programme. The programme was also first in Britain to report an assassination attempt on Pope John Paul II in Vatican City in 1981 and provided the first reports from the Windsor Castle fire of November 1992.
In February 2002, Newsround expanded from a sole ten-minute programme on weeknights to through-the-day bulletins seven days a week to tie-in with the launch of the CBBC Channel. With this included a new theme, titles and presenting team. In 2009, a small bureau for the programme was opened at the BBC's former Manchester studios. As part of the relocation of the BBC Children's Department, Newsround began broadcasting from new studios at dock10, MediaCityUK in Salford Quays on Monday 21 November 2011.


On weekdays, Newsround is broadcast on the CBBC Channel with a five-minute bulletin at 7.40am and ten-minute bulletins airing at 8.15am and 4.20pm.
Weekend bulletins are also broadcast on the CBBC Channel. The Saturday edition includes five-minute bulletins at 8.55am, 12.00pm and 1.35pm. The Sunday edition includes five-minute bulletins at 10.00am and 12.10pm and a ten-minute bulletin at 1.45pm.
The programme was traditionally broadcast as a fifteen-minute programme on BBC One at 5:00pm. The final BBC One edition was broadcast on 20 December 2012.





Edward Barnes (1972)
John Craven (1986–1989)


Martin Dougan (2013–Present)




A variation on the regular format of Newsround is a series of short (typically 15-minute) documentary films, previously broadcast under the title Newsround Extra but now called "specials", which have been a regular feature since the late 1970s. Two or three series of these documentaries air during the year, which replace the regular bulletins on one day of the week (for Extras it was usually Monday, although sometimes on Fridays, particularly during the 1980s).
Newsround Specials in recent years have included:

The Wrong Trainers: a series of six animated films dealing with child poverty. The programme won the 2006 Royalaward for best children's programme and the 2007 BAFTA children's award for best factual programme.

The Worst Thing Ever: a dramatised documentary revolving around a child's experience of their parents' divorce.
Newsround on Knives: an animated look at knife crime from a child's point of view. (Bafta nominated)
Gone: interviews with four bereaved children. (Bafta nominated)
Whose Side Are You On?: a drama on the role of bystanders in tackling, bullying featuring Joe Calzaghe, Aston Merrygold, Patsy Palmer, George Sampson and Gemma Hunt (first shown 16 November 2009)
Caught in the Web: a dramatised documentary on Internet safety featuring case studies from real children, narrated by David Tennant and nominated for a BAFTA in October 2010. (first shown 11 February 2010)
Living with Alcohol: a special about children's experiences with alcohol, presented by Barney Harwood.
"Ricky Investigates": a six-part investigative series which began on 28 September 2010
A one-off Newsround Investigates documentary on arson in schools was broadcast in May 2006.
Football and Race: a special about if racism still exists in football, presented by Ore Oduba (first shown 17 August 2012)
Behind Closed Doors: a special about children's experience with domestic violence, presented by Barney Harwood featuring Alesha Dixon (first shown 19 March 2012)
My Autism and Me: a special about what it is like to have autism with 13-year-old Rosie King (first shown 11 November 2011)
The Real Tracy Beaker: a documentary on growing up in care, presented by Dani Harmer
Welcome to My World: children from different cultures spend a week in each other's lives, narrated by Leah Boleto (first shown 6 December 2011)
Behind the Riots: a special about the riots, what's been going on and why, presented by Sonali Shah (first shown 12 August 2011)
Children of the Drought: a special about the impact of the drought to Kenyan children, presented by Ricky Boleto (first shown 28 July 2011)
Living with Cancer: a special about how cancer affects the lives of children, presented by Dominique Moore (first shown 29 )
Life on the Front Line: a special about why British troops are in Afghanistan and what we are doing, presented by Ore Oduba (first shown 28 February 2011)
Growing Up In A War Zone: a special about how the lives of children in Afghanistan are affected by the war, presented by Sonali Shah (first shown 22 November 2010)
Up And Away: a special about primary school children moving up to secondary school, what it's like and how to deal with it, presented by 14-year-old Rosie King. It was part of CBBC's Moving Up series of programmes.
My Dyslexic Mind: a special about dyslexia, explaining it and what it's like to be a child with it, presented by 12-year-old Ben.
Decision Time USA: a special explaining to kids about the 2012 US election between Barack Obama and Mitt Romney.
Hard Times: a special about children who are finding it tough in the current economic crisis, presented by Ricky Boleto.
Frontline Families: a special about children who are part of a military family, Presented by Martin Dougan.
Children of Kabul - An Uncertain Future": a special explaining how life has changed since troops from the UK and America invaded Afghanistan in 2001, presented by Nel Hedayat.
Surviving The Typhoon: a special about how children coped after one of the most powerful storms ever hit the Philippines, Typhoon Haiyan, presented by Leah Boleto.
America vs Food: a documentary on the issue of obesity and overeating in America, presented by Ricky Boleto (first shown 25 March 2015)
How To Make Friends On Planet Earth: a documentary/drama talking about how to be a good friend, in which an alien comes down to Earth and learns how to be friendly.
Growing Up Black In America: a special on life for black people in America after the rise of the Black Lives Matter movement and the events surrounding it.
Being Me: a special that explores what UK children think of their body image, featuring popstar Meghan Trainor. (2015)
Hiroshima: A Newsround Special: a documentary commemorating the 70th anniversary of the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, talking to a survivor and the youth of Japan about what it means to them. (2015)
Bullying - The Newsround Debate: a debate with a panel of 100 children on the subject of bullying. (2015)
Brothers and Sisters: They make you laugh, drive you mad... and will be your friend for life - brothers and sisters are among the most important people to us. (2016)
Is Tech Taking Over?: Ricky investigates how important technology is to children, taking some away from a group and then giving another group some. (2016)
Defending the Rhino: Ayshah lookd at the fight that rhino are facing in South Africa. (2016)
Inside My Head: A boy called Josh has a mental health problem, and originally didn't speak to anyone which made life difficult for him. (2017)
Finding My Family - Partition: Ricky follows the adventure of three girls to India to find out what happened to their families during Indian Partition 70 years ago. (2017)
Finding My Family - Windrush: Maya and Levi head back to the Caribbean islands that their granddads left to see where they grew up and why they decided to start new lives in the UK. (2018)
Finding My Family - Holocuast: Holocaust survivor Steven Frank takes his teenage granddaughter Maggie on a journey to learn about his experiences during the Holocaust. (2019)
Anne Frank: A Life in Hiding: Nazia explores the story of Anne Frank - a young, Jewish teenager forced to go into hiding with her family during the Holocaust. (2019)



A light-hearted entertainment news round-up, originally known as Newsround Lite and introduced as part of the CBBC Channel's launch in February 2002. The latter version of the show was hosted by regular Newsround presenters/reporters Lizzie Greenwood-Hughes, Adam Fleming, Rachel Horne and Thalia Pellegrini, and produced by Sinéad Rocks. The programme was axed in 2005.



A Saturday morning sports magazine show introduced in September 2005 & produced by Sinead Rocks. It was cancelled in December 2010 and replaced by Match of the Day Kickabout. In 2010 it was presented by Ore Oduba with reporters Des Clarke and Jon Franks.


Until 2006, a half-hour review of the year special was produced for broadcast during the Christmas/New Year period. The last review aired in 2009, and since then the final bulletin of the year is hosted by all presenters who discuss their most memorable news stories.

