Not to be confused with Public Knowledge Project, a non-profit.Public Knowledge is a non-profit Washington, D.C.-based public interest group that is involved in intellectual property law, competition, and choice in the digital marketplace, and an open standards/end-to-end internet.


Public Knowledge was founded by David Bollier and Gigi Sohn.  Gene Kimmelman is president and CEO, Charles Duan is director of its Patent Reform Project, and its directors include Internet Archive Director and Co-founder Brewster Kahle, and former FCC Commissioner Michael J. Copps.
Public Knowledge's work focuses on the three 'IP's of communications and copyright policy: information policy, intellectual property, and Internet Protocol.
The group is known for its advocacy for copyright defenses and exemptions such as fair use and against the expansion of copyright in general. For instance, in response to the FCC's attempt to mandate a broadcast flag for all digital TV tuners, Public Knowledge led the successful legal campaign to have the rule overturned.  One study of the politics of digital rights management policy concluded, "Since its 2001 founding, Public Knowledge has risen to prominence as the pre-eminent DC-based policy advocacy organization within the strong fair use coalition."


The following individuals are on the board as of February 2014.
Leah Belsky -     VP of Strategic Development and Assoc. GC of Kaltura
Hal Bringman - Founder and President of NVPR
Michael J. Copps - Former FCC Commissioner
Maura Colleton Corbett -  President and Founder of Glen Echo Group
Brewster Kahle - Internet Archive, Digital Librarian, Director and Co-founder
Andrew McLaughlin - Entrepreneur-in-Residence from betaworks
Michael Petricone - Senior VP of Government Affairs at Consumer Electronics Association
Gigi B. Sohn - President of Public Knowledge
Kathleen Wallman - President of Wallman Consulting LLC
Kevin Werbach - Professor at The Wharton School, University of PennsylvaniaBoard of Directors EmeritusHal Abelson - Professor at Massachusetts Institute of Technology
David Bollier - Writer and activist
Hon. Reed Hundt - Senior Advisor at McKinsey and Company
Joichi Ito - Director at MIT Media Lab

