This is a list of replicas of Michelangelo's Pietà.


St. Mary's Cathedral, Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
St. Joseph's Catholic Church, Meenkunnam, Kerala, India
St. John's Cathedral, Bundang, South Korea
Minor Basilica of the Immaculate Conception Manila Metropolitan Cathedral, Manila, Philippines
Our Lady of Remedies Parish Malate, Manila, Philippines
Our Lady of Atonement Cathedral, Baguio City, Philippines
Loyola Memorial Park Parañaque City, Philippines
Our Lady of Sorrows Parish, Pasay City, Philippines
La Verna, Bandar Lampung, Indonesia
Cathedral of the Good Shepherd, Singapore
St Laurensius, Alam Sutera, Tangerang Selatan - Banten, Indonesia


St Mary's Cathedral, Sydney, Australia


R.K. kerk Sint Cyriacus en Franciscus in Hoorn, Netherlands
H.H. Simon en Judaskerk in Lattrop, Netherlands
Church of Our Lady of Sorrows, Poznań, Poland
University Church of the Blessed Name of Jesus, Wrocław, Poland


The Slater Memorial Museum, Norwich Free Academy, Norwich, CT. Full-sized cast-plaster copy of the original sculpture.
Basilica of Sainte-Anne-de-Beaupré Quebec City, Canada
Soumaya Museum, Mexico City, Mexico
Cathedral of Our Lady of Refuge, Matamoros, Mexico
Sacred Heart of Jesus Catholic Church] , Anniston Alabama
Cathedral of St. Andrew (Little Rock, Arkansas), Little Rock, Arkansas
Cathedral of Christ the Light, Oakland, California
Hotel Mission De Oro, Santa Nella, California
Mother of Christ Catholic Church, Miami, Florida
Our Lady of Sorrows Basilica, Chicago, Illinois – carved in Pietrasanta Italy by Spartaco Palla.
Alexander Memorial Park Cemetery, Evansville, Indiana.  The full-sized marble statue is located inside The Chapel Of Remembrance mausoleum.
St. Patrick's Catholic Church, Imogene, Iowa
St. Angus Catholic Church, Pouch Cove, Newfoundland, Canada
Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception, Wichita, Kansas 
St. Pius X Catholic Church, Lafayette, Louisiana.  2014 Arte Divine-Vatican Conservatory Foundation, No. 39 of 100, Medium - Cast Marble, Life Size.  Donated by the Stuller Family.
St. Bernard's Parish, Concord, Massachusetts
Holy Family Catholic Church in Saginaw, Michigan
St. Mary's Parish, Spring Lake, Michigan
Cathedral of Saint Paul, National Shrine of the Apostle Paul, Saint Paul, Minnesota
Cathedral Basilica of Saint Louis, Missouri 
Our Mother of Sorrows Cemetery, Reno Nevada. The statue is located at the main entrance to the cemetery
St. Thomas Aquinas Cathedral, Reno, Nevada (This copy is approved by the Vatican according to the Church bulletin)
St. Patrick's Cathedral, New York City
Queens Museum, Queens, New York
Wilhelm's Portland Memorial Funeral Home, Portland, Oregon
Resurrection Catholic Parish, Tualatin, Oregon
The Church of Saint Joseph,  Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania
St. Alexander Roman Catholic Church, Warren, Rhode Island
Hamilton Memorial Gardens, Chapel of Devotion, Hixson, Tennessee, United States
St. Anne's Catholic Church, Beaumont, Texas
St. Jude Catholic Church, Mansfield, Texas
Socorro Mission - La Purisima Catholic Church, Socorro, Texas
Christ United Methodist Church, Salt Lake City, Utah 
St. Mary of the Lakes Parish, Lakewood, Wisconsin
Italian Community Center of Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Mission San Buenaventura, Ventura, California. 2018 Arte Divine-Vatican Conservatory Foundation, No. 73/100, Medium-Cast Marble, Life Size.
Dixie State University’s Dolores Dore Eccles Fine Arts Center, St. George, Utah. #14/100



The Metropolitan Cathedral of Brasília, Brasilia, Brazil.
The Church of Nossa Senhora da Conceição, Urussanga, Santa Catarina, Brazil.
The Church of São Pelegrino, Caxias do Sul, Brazil
The Church of Santiago Apostol Lampa, Puno, Peru
Entrance of Cemetery One, Valparaíso, Chile

