The Sentience Institute is a think tank that specializes in effective altruism and social movement research. It was founded by Jacy Reese and Kelly Witwicki in June 2017 and has published research reports on various social movements and new technologies. For example, in November 2017, it conducted a poll that suggested 47% of American adults support a ban on slaughterhouses, which was replicated by researchers at Oklahoma State University.


Sentience Institute was founded on the principle of effective altruism, a philosophy and social movement that uses evidence and reasoning to determine the most effective ways to benefit others. The institute bill itself as, "an advocacy think tank researching and advising advocates on the most effective strategies to expand humanity’s moral circle." Its founders, Kelly Witwicki and Jacy Reese, were working at Sentience Politics, which was part of the Effective Altruism Foundation. Sentience Politics is now a nonprofit organization running political initiatives in the German-speaking area. Reese had also previously worked at Animal Charity Evaluators as chair of the board of directors and then as a full-time researcher.Witwicki and Reese were selected for Vice Media's 2017 Humans of the Year award. Reporter Matthew Gault described the institute's research agenda as "a huge endeavor." Witwicki spoke of the need for evidence and research in the study of social movements:
There’s a lot of room across all movements for thinking about what’s effective. A lot of times people want to go for what feels right. Factory farming is one of these issues that’s so monumental and so urgent that people have this impulse to shake people and make it stop. I think that that impulse comes from a place of love and altruism, but [you must] take a step back and ask if your methods are going to work in the long run. It might get attention right now but is it going to change people’s mind?


Sentience Institute synthesizes some of its research into a Summary of Evidence for Foundational Questions in Effective Animal Advocacy, which catalogs evidence from a variety of sources with implications for animal advocacy movement strategy.Since 2017, the institute has published several white papers including a study of the British antislavery movement, a study of the French nuclear power movement, and a study of genetically modified food.”The institute polled the views of American adults towards animal agriculture, most notably finding that 47% agreed with the statement, "I support a ban on slaughterhouses." It was replicated in January 2018 by a team of agricultural economists at Oklahoma State University who found the same result.In November 2018, Reese published The End of Animal Farming, which summarizes and builds on most of the institute's research and communicates it with the general public. Near the end of the book, Reese concludes that, “if I had to speculate, I would say by 2100 all forms of farming will seem outdated and barbaric.” Reese criticizes the notion of humane meat.

