A Shape-Up, also called a Line-Up or a Edge-up, is a hairstyle that involves cutting along the natural hairline to make it straight. Shape-ups or edge-ups are basically the fundamental outline for  haircuts today. The haircut grew in popularity during the 1980s, typically with those who have Afro-textured hair. Edge-ups are typically found among men, and often on women with short hair. With the arrival of the edge up,  it created other stylish haircuts. Such as the high top fade and low fades. Along with designs such as crescent moon parts and side parts, also waves in hair. As it continued to gather a following, the shape up continued to become more and more of a common practice for those in the African American community. With strong influences from hip-hop and pop culture the trendy hairstyle became a staple and is here to stay[1]. Entertainers from all walks of the industry and even basketball all-stars laced with the sleek and clean look. 


During the 1970s and the era of disco, most African Americans sported an afro as their cultural representation of the love for their hair. But as time progressed into the next decade, the community began to yearn for something more relevant and with the times. Most people would begin to cut their afros off and in search of something more clean and neat. When this happened, that is when people began to take notice and advantage of the new found look. The shape-up was first introduced into the African American community in the late 1980s. Around the time the mid-1980s happened to be on the horizon, barbers had begun implementing the new trend while cutting hair[2]. Due to the impact of influential hip-hop artist such as Eric B and Rakim, Big Daddy Kane and much more the style of high top fade with the shape up began to become more and more requested for by paying customers.

With the arrival of the 1990s and the trend of the high top fade also declining into the background, the demand for the shape-up remained. Still being socially enforced by hip-hop and black culture, the low top fade was the next adaptation to the shape-ups arsenal of unique looks and styles. This ushered in a new wave of options on how to be laced with an edge-up. Caesar cuts with the grain and against the grain.



The style of the shape-up is usually obtained by an electric razor blade. Though some barbers prefer to use a single hand razor blade for more precision. The electric razor is traced along the natural hairline and given a neat trim. The outcome of this process is a more clean and professional stylish look. The form of the shape-up could be rounded but on most customers, there is a more sleek sharper look to it.


As the style of the shape-up became more popular, so did the culture surrounding it. The visits men would take to the barbershop and get a line up would soon become a very influential topic of discussion points of several topics. Conversations about everything underneath the sun would occur while patiently waiting to get your overdue shape-up. Discussions about politics, sports, movies and your occasional gossip. Movies and often television shows would depict this counsel of men. Such as rapper Ice Cube's production of the movie "Barbershop". This entailed a story of barbers and their faithful clients who would come get their shape-up and vent.

