TPB AFK: The Pirate Bay Away From Keyboard is a documentary film released on 8 February 2013, directed by Simon Klose, based on the lives of the three founders of The Pirate Bay: Peter Sunde, Fredrik Neij and Gottfrid Svartholm. Filming began in Summer 2008, and concluded on 25 February 2012.


The film's website was launched on 28 August 2010, along with a Kickstarter campaign to raise US$25,000 to hire an editor after the Court of Appeal trial. The campaign was fully funded within three days and raised $51,424 in total. In February 2011, the Swedish government's Arts Grants Committee Konstnärsnämnden granted the project an additional 200,000 SEK (≈ $30,000). The film was pitched at Sheffield Doc/Fest's 2009 MeetMarket.



The full film was released under a Creative Commons license (BY-NC-ND) onto The Pirate Bay and other BitTorrent sites. Also, a four-minute shorter version with certain copyright restricted content removed, under a different Creative Commons BY-NC-SA license, was released at the same time to allow editing.  Additionally, a DVD version was also released.TPB AFK's premiered at the 63rd Berlin International Film Festival on 8 February 2013, opening the festival's documentary section, and was released online for worldwide free download at the same time on YouTube and on The Pirate Bay.On 19 February 2013, the film was broadcast on BBC Four in the UK as part of the BBC's Storyville documentary series.


Peter Sunde, one of the subjects of the film, wrote that he has "mixed feelings about the movie and the release of it". While he likes the technical side, he has serious issues with some scenes and general attitude of the film; this includes too much focus put on the trial, too dark depiction of it and portraying himself beyond self recognition. Despite having such different views on the subject, he regards the director as a friend.


On May 2013, Hollywood studios such as Viacom, Paramount, Fox and Lionsgate started to censor Google Search links pointing to the documentary, an action criticized by the director of the film Simon Klose. In June, after the initial controversy, HBO and Lions Gate sent additional bogus DMCA takedown notices to Google requesting the removal of links related to TPB AFK. In response, Simon Klose contacted Chilling Effects which recommended him to file a DMCA counter-notice where he explained that the purpose is "to share the film as much as possible". Two months later, the censored links were reinstated only after public complaints made by the film director.

