The University of Paris VIII or University of Vincennes in Saint-Denis (French: Université Paris 8 Vincennes-Saint-Denis or Université de Vincennes à Saint-Denis) is a public university in Paris. Once part of the federal University of Paris system, it is now an autonomous public institution and is part of the Université Paris Lumières with Paris Nanterre University and Centre national de la recherche scientifique. Most undergraduate degrees (except modern languages) are taught in French.
It is one of the thirteen successors of the world's second oldest academic institution, the University of Paris, and was established shortly before the latter officially ceased to exist on 31 December 1970. It was founded as a direct response to events of May 1968. This response was twofold: it was sympathetic to students' demands for more freedom, but also represented the movement of students out of central Paris, especially the Latin Quarter, where the street fighting of 1968 had taken place.


Founded in 1969, the new experimental institution was named Centre Universitaire Expérimental de Vincennes (CUEV) in Vincennes. In 1971, it gained full university status, thus allowing it to award its own degrees, and renamed "Université Paris VIII". Since moving to Saint-Denis in 1980, the university has become a major teaching and research centre for humanities in the Île-de-France region.


As soon as it opened, Vincennes became the venue for a continuation of 1968, being occupied almost immediately by student radicals, and being the scene of violent confrontations with the police.  One incident, in early 1972, involved a janitors' (travailleurs du nettoyage) strike.  The radicalized janitors invaded classrooms, accused the professors of being scabs, and demanded solidarite.  Meanwhile, there was so much radical leafleting, some university hallways were clogged with ankle-deep crumpled leaflets.
It became particularly notorious for its radical philosophy department, assembled and then headed by Michel Foucault, who in this stage of his career was at his most militant, on one occasion participating in a student occupation and pelting the police outside the building with projectiles. The scandal of this department emerged not around this incident, however, but around one of the philosophy professors, Jacques Lacan's daughter Judith Miller, who was not only a committed communist, like most of the faculty, but indeed a Maoist as well. The department had its accreditation withdrawn after it was revealed that Miller had handed out course credit to someone she met on a bus. (Miller was subsequently fired by the French education ministry after saying in a radio interview that the university was a capitalist institution and that she was trying to make it function as badly as possible.)


Since the turmoil in the late 1960s, the University has endorsed a far more mainstream academic life and has brought in new departments, new professors, and national rules to effect this change. In 1980, the University was relocated to the suburb of Saint-Denis. The University's capacity of 24,000 students per year makes "Paris VIII" an important university with internationally recognized departments in Philosophy, Political Sciences, Cinema Arts, Communication Studies, and Feminist Studies.


The university offers over a hundred undergraduate, graduate and diploma courses. It is particularly well known for its political science programme as it is the only public university in France to offer this subject at undergraduate level.
The University of Paris VIII also offers some distance-learning opportunities for a select number of subjects such as Law and Psychology.


Paris-VIII is exceptionally well-connected and enjoys over 250 partnerships with universities around the world. They include the UC Berkeley, the Beijing Film Academy, Boston University, the Free University of Berlin, the Humboldt University of Berlin, the University of Vienna as well as since 2016 the University of Rojava.Students are encouraged to spend one or two semesters at a neighbouring institution in the US, Canada, Latin America, Asia or Europe in order to develop their language skills and cultural understanding. Alternatively, students also have the possibility to teach French in a high school abroad or to complete an internship.


Philosophy

Gilles Deleuze
François Chatelet
Alain Badiou
Etienne Balibar
Daniel Bensaïd
Pierre Cassou-Noguès
Michel Foucault
Luce Irigaray
Félix Guattari
Sylvain Lazarus
Jean-François Lyotard
Antonio Negri
Jacques Rancière
René Schérer
Jean-Marie VincentPsychoanalysis

Jacques Lacan
Serge Leclaire
Jacques-Alain Miller
François Regnault
Éric Laurent
Slavoj ZizekPolitics and international relations

Gilbert Achcar
Josué de Castro
Masri Feki
Jane FreedmanEconomics

Bernard Maris
Kostas VergopoulosCommunication sciences

Armand MattelartPsychology

Pierre Rabardel
Tobie Nathan (ethnopsychiatry)Hypermedia, new media and cyberculture

Ghislaine Azémard
Jean-Pierre Balpe
Claude Baltz
Jean Clement
Pierre Lévy
Imad Saleh
Jean-Louis WeissbergAnthropology

Alain Bertho
Didier GazagnadouSociology

Jon Elster
Michael Löwy
Jean-Claude Passeron
Nicos Poulantzas
Konstantinos Tsoukalas
Pierre Sorlin
Henri Laborit (behavioral biology, systems thinking)Semiotics

Denis Bertrand
Jean-Claude CoquetArts

Jean-Louis Boissier
Maurice Benayoun
Christine Brooke-Rose
Christine Buci-Glucksmann
Hélène Cixous
Coddy Codd
Edmond Couchot
James Durand
Frank PopperEthnomusicology

Giovanna MariniLinguistics

Martine Abdallah-Pretceille
Nicolas Ruwet
Maurice Gross
Jean Dubois
Richard KayneUniversity Presidents

Joseph E. Aoun

