Women's Health, published by Hearst, is a lifestyle magazine centered on health, sex, nutrition and fitness. It is published 10 times a year in the United States and has a circulation of 1.5 million readers. The magazine has 13 international editions spanning 25 countries and reaching more than 8 million readers globally.The magazine features multiple different sections, such as fitness, sex & love, food, weight loss, Eat This!, health, beauty and style. The "Eat This!" section, instructs readers on substituting healthy alternatives, based on Rodale Inc.’s Eat This, Not That book series. Women’s Health features a celebrity each month as an example of a healthy, active woman. Past Women’s Health cover models include Elisha Cuthbert, Ashley Greene, Anna Kournikova, Michelle Monaghan, Zoe Saldana and Elizabeth Banks.


Women's Health was created in 2005 by Rodale as the sister publication of Men's Health magazine. The test-issue team was headed by Bill Stump, a former Men’s Health editor who was then the head of Rodale Inc.’s "New Product Development" department. The magazine's founding editor-in-chief was Kristina Johnson, previously the original executive editor of Teen People. Within a year, the circulation reached 750,000 readers. David Zinczenko, editor-in-chief of Men's Health magazine, was named editorial director. Jack Essig, SVP/Publisher of Men's Health, was named SVP/Publisher of Women's Health in March 2009.  
Women’s Health is published internationally in the following 14 countries: United States, Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Latin America, China, Germany, Malaysia, New Zealand, Philippines, Poland, Thailand and Turkey. The German edition was launched in April 2011. The South African version, along with Men's Health, is licensed for publication by Media24, with distribution by Magzter.Rodale was acquired by Hearst in 2018.


On the Women's Health website viewers can access videos, print-outs, MP3s and personal trainers to use for working out and living a healthy lifestyle. Women’s Health is connected with nearly 500,000 viewers on Facebook and Twitter. The website also offers almost two million viewers with monthly newsletters. Women’s Health uses their digital resources to connect with their consumers and provide them with the tools they need to succeed in their active lives.


The editors at Women’s Health have teamed together to produce helpful DVDs for their consumers to aid in weight loss, toning or just getting in better physical condition. Some of their DVDs include: Look Better Naked, Ultimate Abs Workout, The Tone-up Workout, The Wedding Workout, and Train for Your Body Type.
In conjunction to DVDs, the Women's Health editors have also published health and fitness books. Women’s Health has pushed its brand with books such as: The Women’s Health Diet, The Big Book of Exercises, The Big Book of Abs, Look Better Naked, and Six Weeks to Skinny Jeans.


Women’s Health  Are you game? is an event that focuses on women’s fitness, nutrition, beauty and style. This all-day event takes place in Chicago and New York City, and features work-out classes, a fashion show, cooking demos, chair massages and more.Women’s Health is a media sponsor for the ZOOMA race. This race features a half marathon, a 5K and 10k race, and a post-race celebration. ZOOMZ 2012 took place in Annapolis, Atlanta, Texas, Cape Cod and The Great Lakes. ZOOMA is an event that celebrates the personal triumphs of women and provides some well-deserved pampering and partying after the race. 
Summer Streets NYC is another event that Women’s Health helps sponsor, this event shuts down some of the streets in New York City to traffic. This gives people the opportunity to explore more of the city via bike or foot. This event was designed to encourage people to explore alternate modes of transportation in the city.


The launch of Women’s Health magazine was one of the most successful today. Currently, WH is ranked #4 on Adweek Media’s “Hot List,” as well as #2 on Advertising Age’s annual “A-List.” Both recognize magazines for their superior performance in advertising and circulation. In March 2008, Women’s Health finished #1 on Adweek’s “10 under 50” Hot List. The magazine was named #2 on Advertising Ages 2008 A List. In 2009, the magazine was named "Magazine of the Year" by Advertising Age. In 2011, Women's Health took home a National Magazine Award for "General Excellence." The brand was named one of AdAge’s “Magazines of the year” in both 2017 and 2018, and was nominated for a National Magazine Award for “magazine section” in 2016 and for “personal service” in 2017.


Founding editor-in-chief, Kristina Johnson, guided Women’s Health from its inception in 2003 until her departure in 2008. Under Johnson, the magazine was named the #1 hottest publication in its circulation category by Ad Week and #2 by Advertising Age (both in 2008). In January 2009, Michele Promalayko took over the title. She was succeeded in 2014 by Amy Keller Laird, who had been the Executive Editor at the magazine.

