The World Classical Tamil Conference 2010 was an international gathering of scholars, poets, political leaders and celebrities with an interest in Tamil people, the Tamil language and Tamil literature. It was held in Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu between 23 June and 27 June 2010 with an expenditure of more than 500 Crores.


The WCTC was held at CODISSIA Trade Fair Complex in Coimbatore and chaired by the then chief minister of Tamil Nadu, M. Karunanidhi and was organised by his government.


The conference was inaugurated by the president of India, Pratibha Patil. Finnish Tamil scholar Asko Parpola was awarded the Kalaignar M. Karunanidhi Classical Tamil award. Tamil scholar V. Sivathambi  from Sri Lanka, UNESCO Director Arumugam Parasuraman, MP and political leader Sitaram Yechury of Communist Party of India (Marxist), D. Raja  of Communist Party of India, Viduthalai Chiruthaigal Katchi president Thol. Thirumavalavan and Pattali Makkal Katchi founder S. Ramadoss participated in the conference. Dignitaries and Tamil scholars were gifted with an exquisitely engraved Thanjavur plate.


Tamil scholar George Hart from the United States, will present a paper on Sangam literature and Indian epigraphist Iravatham Mahadevan will chair a debate on scripts. Rononjoy Adhikari and Kavitha Gangal from Institute of Mathematical Science, who are currently working on a mathematical model to relate the Indus script with the Dravidian language will be involved in the debate on scripts.



The theme song, "Semmozhiyaana Thamizh Mozhiyaam" was penned by the then Tamil Nadu Chief Minister M. Karunanidhi with music by A.R. Rahman. The video was directed by Gautham Menon which had various artists, musicians, singers.


This conference didn't get the approval from the International Association for Tamil Research. Not all agreed with the academic and intellectual rigor of the latter event.The conference and associated activities also faced oppositions and criticisms from various political parties and public. The conference was held to divert people's attention from Sri Lankan War crimes and executed by then Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu. Others viewed it as a prevention of Hindi imposition.

